[SPEAKER_00]: Get 60 seconds.
[SPEAKER_16]: We're live in Salford for the very first time in this election.
[SPEAKER_16]: It's Sunak versus Starmer, the ITV debate.
[SPEAKER_16]: It's the first head-to-head debate in the 2024 general election with these two men who want to run the country, Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Well, good evening.
[SPEAKER_16]: Tonight's debate is set against the toughest of backdrops.
[SPEAKER_16]: Since the UK last went to the polls, we've had a pandemic, Putin's invasion of Ukraine, and a cost-of-living crisis which is still hitting families hard.
[SPEAKER_16]: Huge geopolitical threats loom large, not least, of course, climate change.
[SPEAKER_16]: We all know how tough it's been.
[SPEAKER_16]: We don't need the politicians to remind us.
[SPEAKER_16]: So what are these two men going to offer us?
[SPEAKER_16]: Who are they?
[SPEAKER_16]: And why should they earn our vote?
[SPEAKER_16]: Can they level with us when we know that finances are almost impossibly tight?
[SPEAKER_16]: Later tonight, you'll be able to see what other parties are offering when they're interviewed live on ITV1 by Anushka Astana.
[SPEAKER_16]: And the conversation will continue on the national and regional news.
[SPEAKER_16]: But now, let's get on with tonight's debate.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer, your opening statement, please.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_06]: This election is all about a choice.
[SPEAKER_06]: More of the chaos and division we've seen for the last 14 years or turning the page and rebuilding with Labour.
[SPEAKER_06]: I have ambition for our country and have a practical plan to deliver it.
[SPEAKER_06]: I've changed the Labour Party and put it back in the service of working people.
[SPEAKER_06]: Now I'm seeking your backing to change our country, to make it work once again for you and your family.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Uncertain times call for a clear plan and bold action.
[SPEAKER_07]: So I'll keep this simple.
[SPEAKER_07]: In five weeks, either Keir Starmer or I will be Prime Minister.
[SPEAKER_07]: Beyond raising your taxes and raiding your pensions, no-one knows what Labour would actually do.
[SPEAKER_07]: But you know what I would do?
[SPEAKER_07]: I'll cut your taxes, protect your pension, and reduce immigration.
[SPEAKER_07]: I have a clear plan for a more secure future for you and your family.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you, Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_16]: Well, we invited viewers from right across the country to submit questions.
[SPEAKER_16]: We have independently selected the questioners here with us this evening.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'll also raise some points made by people who couldn't be here.
[SPEAKER_16]: The two leaders don't know what they'll be asked.
[SPEAKER_16]: Also here, people who'll listen to tonight's debate.
[SPEAKER_16]: Some have voted Conservative and Labour in the past and think they will do so on July the 4th.
[SPEAKER_16]: And some have voted for other parties or are undecided.
[SPEAKER_16]: You can join the debate wherever you are by using the hashtag ICVdebate.
[SPEAKER_16]: And just before we go to our first question, a reminder that each leader will have 45 seconds to respond initially.
[SPEAKER_16]: Now, our first question, on the cost of living, Paula from Huddersfield.
[SPEAKER_16]: Paula.
[SPEAKER_12]: Good evening, both.
[SPEAKER_12]: I have worked since I was 15 years old and at the moment I hold a full-time stable job.
[SPEAKER_12]: My children have left home.
[SPEAKER_12]: In the last few years I've found it very difficult to make ends meet and the money simply doesn't go far enough.
[SPEAKER_12]: All I do is work to live.
[SPEAKER_12]: My food bill is nearly doubled.
[SPEAKER_12]: I'm in arrears with my bills.
[SPEAKER_12]: I spend my weekends back cooking so I don't have to turn on my oven in peak times.
[SPEAKER_12]: My savings are gone and I'm genuinely worried about my future.
[SPEAKER_12]: I don't think you actually understand how this is for people like me.
[SPEAKER_12]: So what can you do about that?
[SPEAKER_12]: Thank you very much indeed, Paula, for your question.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Well, Paula, I know how much of a strain the last few years have put on your family finances, the family finances of everyone in our country.
[SPEAKER_07]: And that's why my priority has always been to do what I can to support you.
[SPEAKER_07]: That started with bold action, like the furlough scheme during the pandemic, and more recently, my clear plan to bring inflation back to normal.
[SPEAKER_07]: And now, our economy is growing again, wages are rising, and crucially, we are able to now start cutting your taxes.
[SPEAKER_07]: But I know you're only just starting to see the benefits of that, as you described.
[SPEAKER_07]: So the choice at this election is with my clear plan and bold action to keep cutting your taxes to give you financial security, or put all that progress at risk with higher taxes, £2,000 worth of higher taxes under the Labour Party.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you, Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_16]: Here's Dhani.
[SPEAKER_06]: Paula, I'm really, really sorry to hear the position that you're in.
[SPEAKER_06]: It must be really, really difficult on a daily basis.
[SPEAKER_06]: And there'll be millions of people watching this who feel in a similar position to you that the cost of living crisis is really bearing down on them with constant worry.
[SPEAKER_06]: I'm not going to pretend that Ukraine and COVID hasn't made things worse, but this government has lost control.
[SPEAKER_06]: Liz Truss crashed the economy.
[SPEAKER_06]: They made it worse here than in other countries.
[SPEAKER_06]: And it's people like you that are paying the price, because if a government loses control of the economy, as they have,
[SPEAKER_06]: It's working people that pay the price.
[SPEAKER_06]: And Liz Truss's advisers are in the House of Lords.
[SPEAKER_06]: She's going to be a candidate at the next election.
[SPEAKER_06]: Rishi Sunak is putting her forward.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've got to stop this chaos, got to stop the division, turn a page and start to rebuild under Labour.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you for those opening statements, 45 seconds each.
[SPEAKER_16]: Just to turn to you first, Keir Starmer, the point that Rishi Sunak made is the economy is growing again, the plan is working, is his view.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, he says the plan is working.
[SPEAKER_06]: He says the plan is working.
[SPEAKER_06]: So the question for him is, why has he called the election now?
[SPEAKER_06]: Because if he thinks things are going to get better towards the second half of this year, why has he called it now?
[SPEAKER_06]: He's called it now because he knows, and I'll ask him this, he knows inflation is going to go back up.
[SPEAKER_06]: He knows energy prices are going to go back up in the autumn.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's what he's not telling you.
[SPEAKER_06]: So he says the plan is working, but I don't think he believes the plan is working, because if he thought the plan is working, he wouldn't have called this election right now.
[SPEAKER_06]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: I think it's slightly ironic, because from the moment I got this job, Keir Starmer was telling me, call an election, call an election.
[SPEAKER_07]: And now that we've called an election, he's saying, oh, no, don't have an election, because I don't want to tell you what I'm going to do.
[SPEAKER_07]: And this is the choice for everybody.
[SPEAKER_07]: The plan is working, of course I know.
[SPEAKER_07]: Everyone is only just starting to feel the benefits of it, but inflation is back to normal, wages are growing, taxes are now being cut.
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer would put all that progress at risk.
[SPEAKER_07]: He would put up everyone's taxes by £2,000.
[SPEAKER_07]: £2,000 in higher taxes for every working family in our country after all the hard work and sacrifice we've been through.
[SPEAKER_07]: That's not the right course of action.
[SPEAKER_07]: I don't know why you want to put up people's taxes.
[SPEAKER_06]: Paul, I just don't know how you feel when you hear a Prime Minister say, having heard what you're going through, that the plan is working, it's all all right.
[SPEAKER_06]: I meet so many people who are struggling with their bills and the Prime Minister just keeps saying, he lives in a different world, that it's all all right.
[SPEAKER_07]: If people are struggling with their bills, why do you want to make it harder for them by saddling them with £2,000 worth of higher taxes?
[SPEAKER_07]: How is that going to make Paula or anyone's life easier?
[SPEAKER_07]: Could you respond directly to Rishi Sunak?
[SPEAKER_06]: This is the Prime Minister who's been part of a government that has put up tax 26 times.
[SPEAKER_06]: The last manifesto that they had in 2019 said, we won't put up national insurance.
[SPEAKER_06]: This man then put up national insurance.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's the British expert on tax rises.
[SPEAKER_06]: They're at the highest level for 70 years.
[SPEAKER_06]: And he's got the gall to say other people are going to tax.
[SPEAKER_07]: I know you're going to hear a lot about the past.
[SPEAKER_07]: in this election, but this election is about the future.
[SPEAKER_07]: This election is about the future and I'm clear that I'm going to keep cutting people's taxes as we now are.
[SPEAKER_07]: You want to put everyone's taxes up by £2,000 and this is really important.
[SPEAKER_07]: Independent Treasury officials have costed Labour's policies and they amount to a £2,000 tax rise.
[SPEAKER_07]: Mark my words, Labour will raise your taxes, it's in their DNA, your work, your car, your pension, you name it, Labour will tax it.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm just going to just draw breath there a moment please gentlemen, we're going to be talking about tax again later on.
[SPEAKER_16]: I just want to bring this part of the debate back very firmly to Paula's question.
[SPEAKER_16]: She made it very clear how hard her life is at the moment.
[SPEAKER_16]: You did acknowledge it, both of you.
[SPEAKER_16]: She spends her weekends batch cooking so she doesn't have to turn her oven on during peak times.
[SPEAKER_16]: There is worry here, right before our eyes.
[SPEAKER_16]: that were being echoed across the country.
[SPEAKER_16]: One of the key points that Paula says is, she says, I don't think you understand how hard it is for people like me.
[SPEAKER_16]: What are you going to do about it?
[SPEAKER_16]: How do you actually connect with Paula?
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Well, I'd ask everyone to judge me by my actions.
[SPEAKER_07]: You saw what I did during the pandemic.
[SPEAKER_07]: When disaster struck our country, I implemented the furlough scheme because I knew the devastating impact it would have on people.
[SPEAKER_07]: And you know what?
[SPEAKER_07]: Every week when I'm out and about, someone comes up to me and tells me how furlough saved their family, saved their home, because that's who I am.
[SPEAKER_07]: And I don't want to put that progress at risk.
[SPEAKER_07]: I want to keep delivering financial security by cutting people's taxes.
[SPEAKER_07]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_07]: Whereas the Labour Party want to keep putting people's taxes up, and that's not going to help anyone overcome the challenges they're facing.
[SPEAKER_16]: Paula wants to know what you're going to do about it.
[SPEAKER_06]: I think what you put to the Prime Minister is, how does he connect?
[SPEAKER_06]: And Paula, what I would say is this.
[SPEAKER_06]: My dad works in a factory.
[SPEAKER_06]: He was a toolmaker.
[SPEAKER_06]: My mum was a nurse.
[SPEAKER_06]: We didn't have a lot of money when I was growing up.
[SPEAKER_06]: And we were in a position on occasion where we couldn't pay our bills.
[SPEAKER_06]: So I know how that feels.
[SPEAKER_06]: In our particular case, we had our phone cut off because we didn't have the money.
[SPEAKER_06]: So I do know the anguish of worrying when the postman comes with a bill, what is that bill going to be?
[SPEAKER_06]: Can I pay for it?
[SPEAKER_06]: Are you saying that Rishi...
[SPEAKER_06]: I think the Prime Minister quite understands the position that you and other people are in.
[SPEAKER_06]: I do want to, if I may, just answer that.
[SPEAKER_16]: No, please let Rishi sir respond to that, please.
[SPEAKER_07]: Because this election is about the future and making people's lives better.
[SPEAKER_07]: Now, I've got a clear plan to ease those anxieties that Paula and everyone is facing.
[SPEAKER_07]: Because things are tough, I want to make them easier by continuing to cut your taxes.
[SPEAKER_07]: The difference of this election is Keir Starmer is going to put your taxes up by £2,000.
[SPEAKER_07]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_07]: So if people are worried about their electricity bill, their food bill, taking their kids on a holiday, £2,000 worth of tax rises are not going to help with any of those things.
[SPEAKER_07]: I'll ask again, why do you want to put everyone's taxes up?
[SPEAKER_16]: Under this part of the debate, we're going to be talking about tax again later on, and also to both of you, we'll be talking about that.
[SPEAKER_16]: Paula, thank you very much indeed for your question.
[SPEAKER_16]: We're now going to go to the issue of health and social care, which, like some other issues that may come up in tonight's debate, is a devolved area.
[SPEAKER_16]: That means policies set directly in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and the UK government sets policy for England.
[SPEAKER_16]: So, our next question is about the health service, and it's from Janet from Telford.
[SPEAKER_16]: Janet.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_14]: I've interacted more with the NHS lately than the average person.
[SPEAKER_14]: I'm a cancer survivor.
[SPEAKER_14]: My son is a nurse.
[SPEAKER_14]: I recently lost a cousin who was waiting for surgery.
[SPEAKER_14]: No-one is brave enough to tell us the truth.
[SPEAKER_14]: The NHS is broken.
[SPEAKER_14]: Be honest with us.
[SPEAKER_14]: How long will it take to fix it?
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed.
[SPEAKER_16]: Janet, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: Janet, I'm really sorry to hear about your own position and that of your relatives.
[SPEAKER_06]: My wife works in the NHS in one of the big London hospitals.
[SPEAKER_06]: My mum was a nurse, my sister was a nurse, so the DNA, it runs through my DNA.
[SPEAKER_06]: And you can imagine just how angry I am
[SPEAKER_06]: that it's been broken, and it has been broken, exactly as you describe.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's unforgivable, what's happened to the NHS.
[SPEAKER_06]: And to come into power for 14 years and leave the NHS in a worse state than when you found it is unforgivable in politics.
[SPEAKER_06]: And Rishi Sunak stood 18 months ago, Janet, and said that those waiting lists, which are now nearly 8 million, he said he'll get them down.
[SPEAKER_06]: He made a promise.
[SPEAKER_06]: He said he'd be held accountable.
[SPEAKER_06]: They were 7.2 million at the time.
[SPEAKER_06]: Now they're 7.5 million.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: And that bears down on the NHS.
[SPEAKER_06]: Vishy Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Well, Janet, thank you for sharing your story.
[SPEAKER_07]: And I'm glad that you've recovered.
[SPEAKER_07]: And I'm sorry for your loss as well.
[SPEAKER_07]: Now, my dad was a GP.
[SPEAKER_07]: My mum was a pharmacist.
[SPEAKER_07]: So I'm speaking as someone who was brought up
[SPEAKER_07]: in the NHS, surrounded by people who dedicated their lives to it.
[SPEAKER_07]: And the evenings in my house, growing up, my parents spoke about how they could provide more care for their patients, like you.
[SPEAKER_07]: And that's how I think about the NHS.
[SPEAKER_07]: And of course it's difficult, and you're right, and we have to be honest.
[SPEAKER_07]: about the damage that Covid has done and the time it will take to recover from that.
[SPEAKER_07]: But we've put record funding in, we're training more doctors and nurses, we're doing more checks and scans, and what I want you to know is that the NHS is safe in my hands.
[SPEAKER_07]: I will always stand up for it to give you and everyone else the peace of mind that it will be there for you and your families when you need it.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_16]: Janet put this question.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer agreed with a part of that question that the NHS is broken.
[SPEAKER_16]: Your response to that, Rishi Sunak?
[SPEAKER_07]: As Janet knows, and everyone knows, the NHS is still recovering from COVID.
[SPEAKER_07]: We went through the best part of two years where the NHS couldn't conduct all the treatments it normally would.
[SPEAKER_07]: And it is going to take time to recover from that.
[SPEAKER_07]: But we are now making progress.
[SPEAKER_07]: The waiting lists are coming down.
[SPEAKER_07]: But what Keir Starmer didn't mention to you, which you did, Julie...
[SPEAKER_06]: They're now 7.5 million.
[SPEAKER_06]: He says they're coming down.
[SPEAKER_06]: And this is the guy who says he's good at maths.
[SPEAKER_07]: Yeah, they are now coming down.
[SPEAKER_07]: They are now coming down.
[SPEAKER_06]: 7.2 when you said you'd get them down.
[SPEAKER_06]: 7.2 million.
[SPEAKER_06]: They're now 7.5 million.
[SPEAKER_06]: I'd like you to explain how they're coming down.
[SPEAKER_07]: Because they were coming down from where they were when they were hired.
[SPEAKER_06]: 7.2.
[SPEAKER_07]: And they're now on their way down.
[SPEAKER_07]: They are down.
[SPEAKER_07]: Yes, because the NHS was impacted by industrial action.
[SPEAKER_07]: And if it wasn't for that, half a million appointments would have been saved.
[SPEAKER_07]: So it's somebody else's fault.
[SPEAKER_07]: No, no.
[SPEAKER_07]: But let me address the question, because as you said, Julie, the NHS is devolved.
[SPEAKER_07]: So different parties are responsible for the NHS in different parts of the United Kingdom.
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer's party are responsible for it in Wales.
[SPEAKER_07]: Now, the NHS has been impacted by COVID everywhere.
[SPEAKER_07]: But things are difficult in England, I know that.
[SPEAKER_07]: But if you were in Wales, you would be waiting 40% longer for treatment.
[SPEAKER_07]: Ambulance and A&E times are the worst in Great Britain, and one in four people are on a waiting list.
[SPEAKER_07]: So yes, the NHS has challenges, but it has challenges everywhere regardless of the party that's in charge.
[SPEAKER_06]: I'm looking at Janet's response.
[SPEAKER_06]: When all the Prime Minister can say to her is that what the position is in Wales, Janet, I don't know.
[SPEAKER_06]: You may not be interested in the position in Wales.
[SPEAKER_06]: You may be interested in the position that you're facing and want a Prime Minister who takes responsibility for what he is responsible for.
[SPEAKER_06]: But what you'll get with the Prime Minister is somebody who makes a promise saying, I will be held personally responsible for bringing those waiting lists down.
[SPEAKER_06]: At the moment, they don't come down.
[SPEAKER_06]: What does he do?
[SPEAKER_06]: He blames everybody else.
[SPEAKER_06]: OK, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's a personal responsibility, actually.
[SPEAKER_16]: Actually, sorry, can I just intervene there and ask very specifically then, Keir Starmer, what would you do about the doctor strikes that Rishi Sunak raised?
[SPEAKER_16]: Can you answer that very directly to Rishi Sunak?
[SPEAKER_06]: We've got to resolve them.
[SPEAKER_06]: And for months and months and months, the Prime Minister hasn't resolved them.
[SPEAKER_06]: They've been arguing about who gets in the room.
[SPEAKER_06]: You've got to get in the room, you've got to resolve it, because the NHS needs to get back to work.
[SPEAKER_06]: But we've also got to bring down the waiting list.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've got a plan.
[SPEAKER_06]: for 40,000 extra appointments each and every week.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's 2 million a year to bring those waiting lists down.
[SPEAKER_06]: They're at a record high.
[SPEAKER_06]: And under the last Labour government, the record was waiting lists right down, satisfaction in NHS at a record high.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's completely been turned on its head.
[SPEAKER_06]: OK, Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: I'm really grateful for everyone in the NHS for working so hard and we have now settled pay rises with everyone in the NHS except for the junior doctors and of course I want to do that to make sure it's fair and affordable though but despite being offered the most generous pay settlement anywhere in the NHS and indeed the public sector the Union are demanding a 35% pay rise and I don't want to raise your taxes to pay for that because I don't think it's right but I will say this
[SPEAKER_07]: So when Keir Starmer says he'll resolve it, he hasn't explained to you how, but I will say this... OK, perhaps you can answer that, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, we wouldn't pay the 35%.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've already said that to the doctors.
[SPEAKER_06]: We can't afford it because the government's already broken the economy, and there are many things that now can't be afforded.
[SPEAKER_06]: So we're not going to pay that.
[SPEAKER_06]: But what you can't do is what the Prime Minister has done, which is to say... Well, you just said you'd resolve it.
[SPEAKER_07]: So what would you do?
[SPEAKER_06]: At the end of the day...
[SPEAKER_07]: So you're not going to give them the 35% pay rise that they're asking for, so how would you resolve it?
[SPEAKER_07]: Just standing there and saying, I'll resolve it, isn't an answer.
[SPEAKER_07]: That's not a plan.
[SPEAKER_07]: Prime Minister... How would you resolve it?
[SPEAKER_07]: Prime Minister, your record is... Well, no, no, how would you resolve it?
[SPEAKER_07]: You want to be Prime Minister.
[SPEAKER_07]: How would you resolve the strike?
[SPEAKER_07]: How would you resolve them?
[SPEAKER_06]: I wish you had as much to say when Liz Truss was crashing the economy.
[SPEAKER_06]: Could you answer Rishi Sunak's point, please, Keir Starmer?
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, I will when I can get a word in edgeways.
[SPEAKER_06]: His record is of saying, I'm not going to get in the room to negotiate.
[SPEAKER_06]: And what have we got?
[SPEAKER_06]: We've been in the room to negotiate.
[SPEAKER_06]: What have we got?
[SPEAKER_06]: Ongoing strikes.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's an answer.
[SPEAKER_06]: We have to end these strikes.
[SPEAKER_06]: How?
[SPEAKER_06]: The grown-up way to do that is to get in the room and to negotiate with the doctors and come to a settlement.
[SPEAKER_06]: There's only two ways forward.
[SPEAKER_06]: One is a continuing strike, which is what we've had for a very, very long time.
[SPEAKER_06]: We're now four and a half weeks from election.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's going to kick it into the long grass.
[SPEAKER_06]: Or you get grown up, you go in the room and you resolve this.
[SPEAKER_06]: That does not mean
[SPEAKER_06]: If you agree with the 35%, we can't afford that.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: But we have got to settle on this point.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm going to pause that there, please, because I want to return to another part of Janet's question that you did touch on, that she lost her cousin, who was waiting for surgery.
[SPEAKER_16]: These waiting lists are a matter of life and death.
[SPEAKER_16]: A quick point of information to both of you.
[SPEAKER_16]: If you had loved ones on a long waiting list for surgery,
[SPEAKER_16]: Would you, if you felt that that was the only way forward, use private healthcare, Rishi Sunak?
[SPEAKER_14]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer?
[SPEAKER_16]: No.
[SPEAKER_16]: Absolutely no, if your loved one was on a waiting list for surgery?
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_06]: I don't use private health.
[SPEAKER_06]: I use the NHS.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's where my wife works, in one of the big hospitals.
[SPEAKER_06]: It runs through my dear...
[SPEAKER_16]: Okay, thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: We've had the answers to that very clearly.
[SPEAKER_16]: I just want to pause there to move on to a different aspect of the debate on the NHS.
[SPEAKER_16]: Everyone knows that fixing the NHS depends on fixing social care.
[SPEAKER_16]: Five years ago, Boris Johnson was standing where you both are now.
[SPEAKER_16]: told me there was a plan ready to go on this.
[SPEAKER_16]: We're still waiting.
[SPEAKER_16]: Will you both now commit to a fully funded solution in your manifesto this time round?
[SPEAKER_16]: Yes or no?
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Yes, well, we've already implemented charging reform.
[SPEAKER_07]: Pilots are in place to implement the reforms.
[SPEAKER_07]: They will be rolled out later this year.
[SPEAKER_16]: It will be fully funded in your manifesto.
[SPEAKER_07]: We've already given social care an extra $8 billion because the pressures are immediate.
[SPEAKER_07]: And the pilot reforms are there for charging.
[SPEAKER_16]: OK, we heard that answer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Yes or no?
[SPEAKER_06]: We will have a plan for social care, and like everything else in our manifesto, it will be fully costed and fully funded.
[SPEAKER_06]: It starts with the workforce, because as you know, one of the biggest problems in social care is that the workforce is fragmented, poor conditions, and many, many people.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: You talk about the workforce.
[SPEAKER_06]: If I could just pick up on this workforce.
[SPEAKER_07]: because it is important, because there's no way to get Janet and everyone else the care they need without a workforce.
[SPEAKER_07]: OK.
[SPEAKER_07]: But the British Medical Association... All right, thank you.
[SPEAKER_07]: ..has warned that Keir Starmer's pension tax... OK. ..risks an exodus of doctors.
[SPEAKER_07]: We're talking about doctors from the NHS.
[SPEAKER_07]: OK, we are going to... Gentlemen, please.
[SPEAKER_07]: Gentlemen, actually...
[SPEAKER_07]: It's all joined up.
[SPEAKER_16]: But it's all joined up, but this is an important point.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed.
[SPEAKER_16]: We're going to come on to tax very shortly.
[SPEAKER_03]: But this is about the NHS.
[SPEAKER_16]: I am going to say...
[SPEAKER_16]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_16]: Tax will run through a lot of what we're discussing this evening.
[SPEAKER_16]: We will return very specifically to it.
[SPEAKER_16]: And I just want to stay on the issue of public services and take a quick fire on education.
[SPEAKER_16]: OK?
[SPEAKER_16]: We've had Harry, a message from Harry, who's a teacher just starting out, and Deborah, who has been a primary school head for 40 years.
[SPEAKER_16]: They've both been in touch with us to tell us effectively the same thing.
[SPEAKER_16]: that they cannot believe how bad things are in their sector.
[SPEAKER_16]: They want to know what you can do for them.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Yes, well, I think education is the most powerful way that you can transform people's lives.
[SPEAKER_07]: That was something that my parents raised me with, and I'm grateful to all our teachers for what they're doing, which is why we're backing our schools with record investment at the moment, but also reforming how we teach our kids, which is why I'm proud that, right now, English schoolchildren are the best readers anywhere in the Western world, and that is testament to the hard work of teachers and the reforms of this Conservative government.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, there's a pattern here, isn't there?
[SPEAKER_06]: We've just been talking about the NHS, and Janet says it's broken.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've now gone to education, and the teachers say that's broken as well.
[SPEAKER_06]: And I know the Prime Minister has already said in the first however many minutes of this debate that he doesn't want to have anything to do with the last 14 years.
[SPEAKER_06]: I'm sorry, Prime Minister, you may want to just cast it off, but everybody else is living with it.
[SPEAKER_06]: When it comes to schools, we desperately need more teachers, because in secondary schools, we do not have the teachers we need.
[SPEAKER_06]: So, for example, on key issues like maths,
[SPEAKER_06]: We have maths being taught, and parents watching this will know, by supply teachers, by PE teachers, but not maths teachers.
[SPEAKER_06]: So we would have in place, one of our first steps would be to recruit 6,500 teachers to fill those gaps, which will help the existing teachers who are struggling to cope with the mess that this government has left them in.
[SPEAKER_16]: So tell Rishi Sunak why you're going to raise VAT on private schools to achieve the money that you say you will spend on those extra teachers.
[SPEAKER_16]: Why are you making that choice?
[SPEAKER_16]: Tell Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_06]: Because I believe every child should have the teachers they need in the core subjects like maths.
[SPEAKER_06]: I think, for a child in a state secondary school who doesn't have a core teacher in something like maths, is going to live with that for the rest of their lives.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's not a one-year problem or a two-year problem.
[SPEAKER_06]: If they're in their GCSEs, it's for life.
[SPEAKER_06]: And, therefore, we will have 6,500 recruits.
[SPEAKER_06]: OK. We will get rid of the tax break on private schools to pay for it.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's a tough choice.
[SPEAKER_06]: I do understand that.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's a tough choice.
[SPEAKER_06]: Rishi Sunak, you've explained the policy, thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak, if you'd like to respond directly to Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_07]: I don't agree with it, because I think people who work hard and aspire to provide that education for their kids should have that freedom.
[SPEAKER_07]: That's what my parents did, and I'll support it.
[SPEAKER_07]: But you heard it.
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer is going to raise taxes.
[SPEAKER_07]: But that's just the start, because there's a long list of other things that he needs to find the money for.
[SPEAKER_07]: So it's not just going to start and stop there.
[SPEAKER_07]: There are £2,000 worth of tax rises coming for every working family in this country.
[SPEAKER_07]: And as I said, he's saying to you he's going to raise taxes.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, I do need to answer that.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's not the start, and that's not the end.
[SPEAKER_06]: I do need to answer that, because he put that figure out there.
[SPEAKER_06]: Very briefly.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, what's happened here is it's a classic.
[SPEAKER_06]: They put in pretend Labour policies to the Treasury, and then they get a false readout.
[SPEAKER_06]: So I'll just tell you, what they've put in for this analysis is a mental health policy that isn't the Labour Party's policy.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's put in one of his own policies.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's asked the civil service to cost it, and they've come up with this figure of £2,000.
[SPEAKER_06]: The expert...
[SPEAKER_06]: They are an independent civil service.
[SPEAKER_06]: All right, I think...
[SPEAKER_06]: He's put it twice.
[SPEAKER_06]: I do need to deal with it.
[SPEAKER_16]: Gentlemen, please, may I just say that people are going to have a lot of figures to get their heads around tonight.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm not saying that people are more than capable of calculating that rapidly at home, but I do want to actually draw the focus then, given we're on this patch, very specifically onto the question of tax.
[SPEAKER_16]: I want to talk very specifically about tax before we finish this first half of our debate.
[SPEAKER_16]: Can we clarify the similarities in your positions?
[SPEAKER_16]: Please raise your hand if I am wrong.
[SPEAKER_16]: You, as Prime Minister, will not raise income tax.
[SPEAKER_16]: You will not raise national insurance in the next Parliament.
[SPEAKER_16]: And other than Labour on private schools, you will not raise VAT.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you for that instructive moment.
[SPEAKER_16]: We've had a lot of viewers getting in touch to ask where is the money coming from to solve the huge challenges raised by Paula, Janet and many others.
[SPEAKER_16]: Are you two gentlemen being honest?
[SPEAKER_06]: We will raise specific taxes, and we've been really clear what they are.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've already dealt with the tax break on private schools.
[SPEAKER_06]: We want to end the non-DOM status completely.
[SPEAKER_06]: I think that the super-rich should be paying their tax.
[SPEAKER_06]: I want to get rid of the equity loopholes that are there, again, for the super-rich, and I think the oil and gas companies should be paying their fair share towards our energy.
[SPEAKER_06]: So, we will raise those, but we won't raise the others.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Yes, well, we have already scrapped the Nondon regime and we have a £0.75 tax on energy companies, but independent Treasury civil servants have costed Labour's policies and it's £2,000.
[SPEAKER_07]: But you asked for specifics, Julie, so let's have a specific difference.
[SPEAKER_16]: Please let Mr Sunak finish.
[SPEAKER_07]: The Triple Lock Plus, so that we raise the personal allowance for pensioners and ensure that the state pension is never subject to tax.
[SPEAKER_07]: That's all you'll get under a future Conservative government.
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer hasn't matched that pledge, which means for the first time in our country's history, if Labour are elected, pensioners will pay tax.
[SPEAKER_07]: I do not think that is right, and you should explain to everyone why you think pensioners will be paying a retirement tax under your government.
[SPEAKER_06]: Briefly, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: Briefly, please, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: What the Prime Minister has done so far in the two weeks of this campaign is to make desperate gimmicks and put them on the table.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's told us it's their policy to get rid of national insurance altogether.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's £46 billion.
[SPEAKER_06]: He said it's their policy to get rid of inheritance tax.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's £10 billion.
[SPEAKER_06]: He says he's going to get rid of
[SPEAKER_06]: tax on pensioners.
[SPEAKER_06]: You're just talking nonsense.
[SPEAKER_06]: Just answer the specific question.
[SPEAKER_06]: We have committed, I can tell you...
[SPEAKER_07]: Thank you, not over each other.
[SPEAKER_07]: We've committed to the Triple Lock Plus.
[SPEAKER_07]: Under us, the state pension will never pay tax.
[SPEAKER_07]: Under you, there's a retirements tax coming for British pensioners.
[SPEAKER_07]: I think it's appalling.
[SPEAKER_07]: Explain to people why pensioners should pay tax on the state pension.
[SPEAKER_06]: The big problem with Liz Truss is that she made unfunded tax cuts.
[SPEAKER_06]: The Prime Minister is doing the same thing.
[SPEAKER_06]: We're going to go round the circle again.
[SPEAKER_06]: Back to square one.
[SPEAKER_07]: You asked about it.
[SPEAKER_07]: It's very clear, pensioners
[SPEAKER_07]: under Keir Starmer will pay tax on the state pension for the first time in our country's history.
[SPEAKER_07]: It is a retirement tax and Keir Starmer can talk about the past all he wants but in the future pensioners have got a tax rise coming under your government.
[SPEAKER_07]: Why do you want to put up their taxes?
[SPEAKER_16]: Gentlemen, please, we're just going to take a pause there.
[SPEAKER_16]: I just want to put this on the table.
[SPEAKER_16]: The Institute for Fiscal Studies independently has assessed that you are joining in a conspiracy of silence in not acknowledging the scale of the choices and trade-offs that will face us after the election.
[SPEAKER_16]: Unprotected budgets, that's budgets for areas outside of schools, the NHS and defence.
[SPEAKER_16]: they could face up to 4% of cuts a year.
[SPEAKER_16]: One word.
[SPEAKER_16]: Can you rule those cuts out?
[SPEAKER_16]: Are you being level with us?
[SPEAKER_16]: One word with us, yes or no?
[SPEAKER_07]: We're going to continue investing record sums in public services.
[SPEAKER_16]: I ask, yes or no?
[SPEAKER_06]: No, we're not going to go back to austerity.
[SPEAKER_06]: I ran a public service for five years, the Crown Prosecution Service.
[SPEAKER_06]: I know how hard it is.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you very much indeed.
[SPEAKER_06]: But you don't have enough money.
[SPEAKER_06]: I believe in our public services.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you, Rishi Sunak, for the time being.
[SPEAKER_16]: We will take a breath.
[SPEAKER_16]: After the break, we'll be discussing immigration, climate, and we'll take a closer look at what sort of leader Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer would be.
[SPEAKER_16]: Don't go away.
[SPEAKER_16]: Welcome back to Sunak versus Dahmer, the ITV debate.
[SPEAKER_16]: The first half was dominated by the cost of living and public services.
[SPEAKER_16]: Just a little information for both of our candidates here.
[SPEAKER_16]: Please, an appeal from me not to speak over one another.
[SPEAKER_16]: We want to make sure that everybody can hear what you're saying.
[SPEAKER_16]: That was a gentle reminder.
[SPEAKER_16]: It may not be so gentle next time.
[SPEAKER_16]: We now turn to another important issue in this election, and that is immigration.
[SPEAKER_16]: And our next questioner is Stephen from Warrington.
[SPEAKER_16]: Stephen.
[SPEAKER_10]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_10]: Politicians have broken so many promises on immigration.
[SPEAKER_10]: Why should I trust either of you to do anything about such large numbers of people risking their lives to cross the Channel to gain access to the UK illegally?
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed, Stephen.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Stephen, immigration is too high, and we will need to take bold action to bring it down, whether that's legal migration, where we're going to introduce a new legal cap to guarantee that it will come down every year, or the boats, which you mentioned, where we got the numbers down last year by a third, and now we have a deterrent ready to go.
[SPEAKER_07]: Migrants have been detained, the flights will go in July, but only if I'm your Prime Minister.
[SPEAKER_07]: If Keir Starmer's elected,
[SPEAKER_07]: All those people will be released, the flights will be cancelled and we will have no deterrent to stop the unfairness of people crossing in boats.
[SPEAKER_07]: So that's the choice for you at this election.
[SPEAKER_07]: Stick to our plan and illegal migrants will be on those planes.
[SPEAKER_07]: With Labour, they will be out on our streets.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much, Rishi Sunak, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, Stephen, the levels of migration are at record highs, 685,000.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's never been that high, save in the last year or two.
[SPEAKER_06]: The Prime Minister says it's too high.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, who's in charge?
[SPEAKER_06]: Who's in charge?
[SPEAKER_06]: He's the most liberal Prime Minister we've ever had on immigration.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've never had numbers like this before.
[SPEAKER_06]: And he says that you can believe him on the boats.
[SPEAKER_06]: Nobody should be making that crossing across the Channel.
[SPEAKER_06]: 18 months ago, the Prime Minister made a promise.
[SPEAKER_06]: He said, just like the NHS promise, you're personally accountable for it, that he would stop the boats.
[SPEAKER_06]: This year alone, 10,000 people have crossed on boats.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's a record number.
[SPEAKER_06]: So again, he's made a promise, and he's completely failed to keep it.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak, respond directly to Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_07]: Over the last 12 months, the number of crossings have down a third because the plans we've put in place are starting to make a difference.
[SPEAKER_07]: But the choice of this election is about the future.
[SPEAKER_07]: I believe you need to have a deterrent.
[SPEAKER_07]: The only way to stop this problem is to say to people who come here illegally, they cannot stay and they will be removed.
[SPEAKER_07]: If I'm your Prime Minister, the planes will go to Rwanda, we will have a deterrent.
[SPEAKER_07]: So the simple question for Keir Starmer is, what will you do with people who come here illegally?
[SPEAKER_16]: What will you do with them?
[SPEAKER_07]: Very simply, what will you do with them?
[SPEAKER_07]: That's what I'm going to do.
[SPEAKER_07]: We'll have a deterrent.
[SPEAKER_06]: What are you going to do?
[SPEAKER_06]: We need to smash the gangs that are running this vile trade, making a huge amount of money, putting some of the most vulnerable people in boats across the Channel.
[SPEAKER_06]: They're making a fortune.
[SPEAKER_06]: Before I was a politician, Stephen, I was the Director of Public Prosecutions, and I worked with the police and prosecutors in other countries to bring down terrorist gangs who were running across borders.
[SPEAKER_06]: I do not believe it's impossible to bring down these gangs.
[SPEAKER_06]: What I won't do is engage in an expensive gimmick, the Rwanda scheme.
[SPEAKER_06]: If he believed it was going to work, he wouldn't have called an election before it can be tested.
[SPEAKER_06]: He wouldn't have done it.
[SPEAKER_07]: Phil, Keir Starmer said, smash the gangs.
[SPEAKER_07]: We put new laws in Parliament that have now led to almost 1,000
[SPEAKER_07]: criminals and people smugglers being arrested, serving hundreds of years in jail.
[SPEAKER_07]: Because we do need to smash the gangs.
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer voted against those laws.
[SPEAKER_07]: So as ever, you say one thing here, but your track record says something completely different, and you can't be trusted to tackle immigration.
[SPEAKER_06]: So, why are the numbers this year 10,000 record numbers?
[SPEAKER_06]: Why is that?
[SPEAKER_07]: Because this is a challenge.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's on your watch.
[SPEAKER_07]: This is a growing challenge, but I've got a plan to deal with it, because I'm going to put people on planes.
[SPEAKER_07]: What are you going to do with them?
[SPEAKER_07]: I can tell everyone what I'm going to do.
[SPEAKER_07]: You might not like it, but I've got a plan, because we've got to have a deterrent.
[SPEAKER_07]: What are you going to do?
[SPEAKER_07]: Just tell everybody.
[SPEAKER_07]: What are you going to do with illegal migrants who arrive?
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak, please, can we just...
[SPEAKER_16]: Please, gentlemen.
[SPEAKER_16]: We will lower our voices.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer, please respond directly to Rishi's statement.
[SPEAKER_06]: There's a pattern of behaviour here.
[SPEAKER_06]: He said he would get waiting lists down.
[SPEAKER_06]: They've gone up.
[SPEAKER_06]: He said he would stop the boats.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've got record numbers coming.
[SPEAKER_06]: The promises he make are not worth the paper they're written on.
[SPEAKER_06]: His plan is failing.
[SPEAKER_06]: We do have to deal with this problem, Stephen.
[SPEAKER_06]: We absolutely have to deal with it.
[SPEAKER_06]: We have to smash the gangs that are doing it.
[SPEAKER_06]: I will never accept
[SPEAKER_06]: that the only criminal gangs that can't be taken down are these vile gangs.
[SPEAKER_06]: I've taken down terrorist gangs in my past.
[SPEAKER_06]: I've seen how it's done.
[SPEAKER_06]: I know it can be done.
[SPEAKER_06]: We'll have a border security command, if I'm Prime Minister, and we will get that done and stop this vile trade and those boats coming home with very vulnerable people.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm just going to call a pause there.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_16]: A very specific question to you, if I may, Rishi Sunak, and that is on the European Convention on Human Rights.
[SPEAKER_16]: If your Rwanda plan is blocked by the courts, and will this appear in your manifesto, that you would remove the UK from the European Convention on Human Rights?
[SPEAKER_16]: Is that part of your plan?
[SPEAKER_16]: Will that be in your manifesto?
[SPEAKER_07]: I've been crystal clear.
[SPEAKER_07]: I believe all our plans are compliant with our international obligations, but if I am forced to choose between securing our borders and our country's security or a foreign court, I'm going to choose our country's security every single time.
[SPEAKER_16]: So that's a yes.
[SPEAKER_16]: Excuse me, can I be clear, that is a yes?
[SPEAKER_07]: I've been crystal clear.
[SPEAKER_07]: I will choose our country's security ahead of membership of a foreign court every single time.
[SPEAKER_16]: Very, very clear answer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer, respond to that directly.
[SPEAKER_16]: To Rishi Sunak, please.
[SPEAKER_06]: No, if I'm Prime Minister, we will not pull out of international agreements and international law, which is respected the world over.
[SPEAKER_06]: Because I want the UK to be a respected player on the global stage, not a pariah who doesn't agree with international law.
[SPEAKER_06]: And those laws were put in place after the Second World War, after the horrors of the Second World War, when all governments, all countries came together and said, never again.
[SPEAKER_06]: And it was a Conservative government.
[SPEAKER_06]: Churchill's fingerprints are on this instrument.
[SPEAKER_06]: So important was it for the Conservative Party.
[SPEAKER_06]: This Conservative Party is a million miles away.
[SPEAKER_06]: from the Conservative Party of Oldham.
[SPEAKER_16]: I have a direct question to put to you, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: You sound quite similar.
[SPEAKER_16]: Just to confirm for both of you on the issue of safe routes.
[SPEAKER_16]: Are safe routes for people crossing the Channel not the answer?
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, I don't think anybody should be crossing the channel.
[SPEAKER_06]: In relation to some countries, I do agree with safe routes.
[SPEAKER_06]: So, for example... Just give me an example.
[SPEAKER_06]: Afghanistan, where everybody will observe the terrible scenes when the Taliban took over, and people risk their lives to interpret for our forces, etc.
[SPEAKER_06]: I thought they should be allowed to come here to safety, and I supported the safe routes for them to do so.
[SPEAKER_06]: There are circumstances where I do believe that's the right thing to do.
[SPEAKER_06]: Ukraine is another example.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: We just need to keep this brief.
[SPEAKER_16]: Yes or no to safe routes for those crossing the Channel?
[SPEAKER_07]: Of course we should have safe routes.
[SPEAKER_07]: But when we've controlled our borders, we will be able to have a conversation about the right number to accept.
[SPEAKER_07]: We've been a very generous, compassionate country.
[SPEAKER_07]: But we talk about European conventions.
[SPEAKER_07]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_07]: 20 European countries almost now have agreed with my approach.
[SPEAKER_07]: Believe that you need to be able to return people to a safe country, otherwise you can't solve this problem.
[SPEAKER_07]: We still haven't heard from Keir Starmer and this is meant to be a debate about the future.
[SPEAKER_07]: I will put people on planes to create that deterrent.
[SPEAKER_07]: Multiple other European countries agree with that.
[SPEAKER_07]: What will you do with illegal migrants who come here?
[SPEAKER_07]: What will you do with them?
[SPEAKER_16]: Would you consider processing asylum claims in a third country, Keir Starmer?
[SPEAKER_06]: Yes, if that was possible to do it in compliance with international law, of course.
[SPEAKER_06]: But just let me deal with this, because...
[SPEAKER_06]: So you do now agree...
[SPEAKER_06]: So you... You've just changed your mind on this.
[SPEAKER_07]: I thought we were not going to talk over each other.
[SPEAKER_07]: So you do now agree with third-country deals?
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed.
[SPEAKER_06]: Can I just get a word in, actually?
[SPEAKER_16]: Mr Sunak.
[SPEAKER_06]: Mr Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: At the moment, people arriving by small boats are not having their claims processed.
[SPEAKER_06]: By the end of the year, that means there'll be 100,000 people in hotels at taxpayers' expense who are not having their claims processed.
[SPEAKER_06]: That means one thing, they cannot be returned.
[SPEAKER_06]: And that's why returns have gone down by 40% on his watch.
[SPEAKER_06]: Now, he'll say again, well, don't look at the last 14 years.
[SPEAKER_06]: I know that was terrible.
[SPEAKER_06]: Don't look at that.
[SPEAKER_06]: I'm just looking forward.
[SPEAKER_06]: But I'm sorry, we're all living with the consequences.
[SPEAKER_06]: of your awful decision.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Gentlemen, thank you very much indeed for that.
[SPEAKER_16]: We are trying to get as many topics in.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: No, thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm just going to draw a line under that.
[SPEAKER_16]: We are just trying to cover as much ground as possible.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm sure you both understand that.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: We're going to turn now to our fourth question from Omer from Manchester.
[SPEAKER_16]: Omer.
[SPEAKER_03]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_03]: I'm worried about the UK's lack of leadership on the world stage.
[SPEAKER_03]: I want our PM to be strong enough to take a stand even when it's hard.
[SPEAKER_03]: So what should happen next to stop these awful scenes we're seeing in Gaza?
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed for that question, Omar.
[SPEAKER_16]: And that question there, it has a wide range to it, but very specifically, it is about the Hamas terrorist atrocities of October the 7th and then what unfolded after, the scenes of which we see on our television news every evening.
[SPEAKER_16]: So I'd like you both, please, to address that particular situation.
[SPEAKER_16]: A lot of people have been very uncomfortable with the stance that both of you have taken on this.
[SPEAKER_16]: How would you respond, first to Keir Starmer?
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, Emma, the situation in Gaza is intolerable.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's catastrophic.
[SPEAKER_06]: tens of thousands of people have been killed, a disproportionate number of women and children.
[SPEAKER_06]: So, Omar, what we need now is a ceasefire, a cessation of the hostilities straight away.
[SPEAKER_06]: And for these purposes, which is really important because it's a very grave situation, firstly, we have to get the hostages out.
[SPEAKER_06]: They've been held for a very, very long time, and I dread to think that the state they're in.
[SPEAKER_06]: Secondly, we desperately need humanitarian aid into Gaza.
[SPEAKER_06]: Desperately, it's catastrophic.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thirdly, and this is where the leadership piece comes in, we have to find a path to a lasting resolution.
[SPEAKER_06]: That has to be a two-state solution, and we need to show leadership on that.
[SPEAKER_06]: And I know that if we're elected into office, if we're humble enough to serve, that will be my solemn duty.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Yes, Omar, it's an awful situation.
[SPEAKER_07]: And I'm pleased, actually, that Keir Starmer supported, alongside me, Israel's right to defend itself in the face of the atrocious attack that they suffered.
[SPEAKER_07]: But right now, you're seeing that US have put a deal on the table, which we strongly support, together with our allies, to bring an immediate end to the hostilities, release hostages, get more aid in, and then build towards a lasting settlement with a two-state solution.
[SPEAKER_07]: We've led in providing more aid to Gaza, something I'm proud that we've done.
[SPEAKER_07]: Our troops have helped build the port that's being established.
[SPEAKER_07]: But more generally, the world is a more uncertain place.
[SPEAKER_07]: What Hamas is doing is indicative of the dangers we face, which is why I've made the bold decision also to lead, to increase investment in our country's defence, because I think that's necessary to keep you safe, everyone safe.
[SPEAKER_07]: It's something that the Labour Party have not matched.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed for those serious, considered responses to the first part of Omer's question.
[SPEAKER_16]: You raised a question there very specifically at the end of that statement, Rishi Sunak, raising the question about our security or otherwise under the potential leadership of Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Do you really think the man standing next to you is a threat to our national security?
[SPEAKER_07]: I don't think the Labour Party can be trusted to keep this country as safe as the Conservatives.
[SPEAKER_07]: The world is a more dangerous and uncertain place than at any point since the end of the Cold War.
[SPEAKER_07]: I've made the decision to invest more in our defence, taking it up to 2.5% of GDP.
[SPEAKER_07]: Labour Party have not matched that.
[SPEAKER_07]: And worse than that, the person who would be Deputy Prime Minister under Keir Starmer does not believe in our nuclear deterrent, the ultimate guarantor of our security.
[SPEAKER_07]: So no, you can trust the Conservatives with our country's security, and my track record and our commitments prove that.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_07]: This is shocking.
[SPEAKER_06]: Before I was a politician, I was the Director of Public Prosecutions.
[SPEAKER_06]: I was working on national security.
[SPEAKER_06]: I was dealing with terrorist plots.
[SPEAKER_06]: One of them that we prosecuted was to take down seven aeroplanes as they were halfway across the Atlantic.
[SPEAKER_06]: They were going to be blown up.
[SPEAKER_06]: That is one of the cases that I prosecuted, knowing how important it is to keep everybody in this country safe and sound.
[SPEAKER_06]: Imagine what would have happened if those planes had gone down.
[SPEAKER_06]: for the Prime Minister, who was at the time making money, betting against the country during the financial crisis.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's what he was doing when I was acting on national security.
[SPEAKER_06]: To now say that somehow national security is safer in his hands is insulting and it's childish.
[SPEAKER_16]: OK, thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: A very brief response to that.
[SPEAKER_07]: I'd have rather had my job than work for extremists like Abu Qatada and Hizb ut-Tahrir.
[SPEAKER_06]: What, the Crown Prosecuting Service is an extremist organisation?
[SPEAKER_07]: No, no, Abu Qatada and Hizb ut-Tahrir are who you work for as well, so people can Google that and have a look.
[SPEAKER_07]: But there's a clear choice.
[SPEAKER_07]: Desperate.
[SPEAKER_07]: I'm investing more in our country's defence, up to 2.5% of GDP.
[SPEAKER_07]: OK. You are not doing that.
[SPEAKER_07]: So how can you tell people you will keep them safe when you're not willing to invest more in our country's security?
[SPEAKER_07]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: We've explored both those positions.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm just going to just draw a breath there just once again.
[SPEAKER_16]: We've got a quick-fire question for you from Stephen from West Sussex, who sent us a question and asked, just very quickly, a very brief answer from both of you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Would convicted criminal Donald Trump be someone you, as Prime Minister, would want a special relationship with?
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: If he's elected president of the US, then we will deal with him.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's up to the people in the US to decide who they want as their president.
[SPEAKER_06]: Even if he's a criminal?
[SPEAKER_06]: The special relationship transcends whoever fills the post of prime minister and president, because it's such an important, strong relationship.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak?
[SPEAKER_07]: Yes, because having a strong relationship with our closest partner and ally in the United States is critical for keeping everyone in our country safe.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you for those brief answers, Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: We're going to go on to another question now, and this one is on the very pressing issue on climate change.
[SPEAKER_16]: And we're going to go to Claire from South London.
[SPEAKER_16]: Hi, Claire.
[SPEAKER_13]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_13]: The world is facing a climate catastrophe now.
[SPEAKER_13]: Both of you have broken promises on the environment.
[SPEAKER_13]: What are you doing to put climate at the very centre of your policies?
[SPEAKER_13]: Thank you very much, Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Well Clare, I have two young girls and this is what they talk to me about more than anything else.
[SPEAKER_07]: And of course we're going to tackle climate change and get to net zero.
[SPEAKER_07]: This election is about how we do it.
[SPEAKER_07]: And I don't think that British people should solve a global problem all by themselves, which is why I'm also prioritising our country's energy security,
[SPEAKER_07]: and your bills.
[SPEAKER_07]: We've heard a lot about the cost of living challenges today.
[SPEAKER_07]: So I have made some decisions, bold decisions, that will mean that we can save all of you thousands of pounds, still meet our targets, and we can ensure our country's energy security.
[SPEAKER_07]: The contrast is clear at this election, because Keir Starmer will reverse all of the changes I've made.
[SPEAKER_07]: That's going to cost everyone and you thousands of pounds and make our country less energy secure by banning North Sea energy.
[SPEAKER_07]: And that, I don't think, is the right course for our country.
[SPEAKER_06]: This £2,000, he keeps saying it's going to cost, is absolute garbage.
[SPEAKER_06]: We won't go into the details of it.
[SPEAKER_06]: But Clare, let me address your point, because this is really important.
[SPEAKER_06]: A transition is coming that's very important when it comes, for example, to energy, a transition to renewables.
[SPEAKER_06]: I don't think we should just see that as a challenge.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's a huge opportunity, because if we go to renewable energy, that means cheaper bills.
[SPEAKER_06]: Renewables are cheaper, not just for the short term, but for the long term.
[SPEAKER_06]: It gives us energy security, so it means that Putin can't put his boot on our throat and the result you've all been feeling for the last two years.
[SPEAKER_06]: But it also gives us the next generation of jobs.
[SPEAKER_06]: Other countries have realised renewables is the future.
[SPEAKER_06]: They're in the race.
[SPEAKER_06]: I want the UK to be in the race.
[SPEAKER_06]: I want us to win the race.
[SPEAKER_06]: When it comes to hydrogen...
[SPEAKER_06]: offshore wind, solar, nuclear.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: The question I ask is why not...
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_16]: That's 45 seconds, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: We're going to try and stick to the rules if we can.
[SPEAKER_16]: There's a very specific point that Clare makes in her question.
[SPEAKER_16]: Both of you have broken your promises on the environment.
[SPEAKER_16]: Will you acknowledge that, Rishi Sunak?
[SPEAKER_07]: No, we're going to stick to the targets we've put in place, but we're going to do it in a way that saves you all money.
[SPEAKER_07]: I'm not going to impose thousands of pounds of costs on you to arbitrarily rip out your boiler, change your car, convert your home.
[SPEAKER_07]: When we've been talking about the cost of living challenges earlier in this debate, I don't think adding thousands of pounds of costs to you is the right thing.
[SPEAKER_07]: Now, Keir Starmer is going to reverse those changes that I made.
[SPEAKER_07]: So everyone is facing thousands of pounds of higher bills.
[SPEAKER_07]: That is the choice at this election.
[SPEAKER_16]: Let Keir Starmer respond to that and address the issue of broken promises.
[SPEAKER_16]: Please respond directly to what we've just heard.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's hard to respond because he's making it up as he goes along.
[SPEAKER_06]: But let me do the best that I can because the promise I made was clean power by 2030.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's one of my five missions, Claire, one of the most important things that I want to
[SPEAKER_06]: an incoming Labour government with a driving sense of purpose to achieve.
[SPEAKER_06]: Clean power by 2030.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's the promise I've made.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's the promise I'll keep.
[SPEAKER_06]: It'll be in our manifesto.
[SPEAKER_06]: It'll be fully costed and fully funded.
[SPEAKER_06]: But the Prime Minister is slowing down on the climate change.
[SPEAKER_06]: The problem with that is not only is that inconsistent with our obligations, it will cost more in the long run.
[SPEAKER_06]: OK, let me see Sunak respond to that.
[SPEAKER_07]: So it's completely head in the sand stuff.
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer's going to reverse the changes I made.
[SPEAKER_07]: To install a heat pump now, if you don't need to, costs about £7,000 or £10,000.
[SPEAKER_07]: To convert your home, again, if you're in a terraced house in Darlington, £10,000.
[SPEAKER_07]: Changing your car sooner than America, Canada, Sweden, France, Germany, as he wants you to do, thousands of pounds.
[SPEAKER_07]: OK, let Keir Starmer respond...
[SPEAKER_07]: There's a simple choice at this election.
[SPEAKER_07]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_07]: If you think Labour are going to win, start saving.
[SPEAKER_16]: OK, let Keir Starmer respond to those specific points.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, the company that the Prime Minister's been using to try and trail out these figures has done some analysis, which was actually published today, Prime Minister.
[SPEAKER_06]: You obviously haven't seen it.
[SPEAKER_06]: What they say, this is the company he's relying on, is that will cost more, the 2030 plan, if you're with the Prime Minister than with a Labour government.
[SPEAKER_06]: And that's been public.
[SPEAKER_06]: I don't know whether you've been too busy or you perhaps haven't seen it, but the very company that he relies on to trot out these false figures is actually saying it's more expensive with the Conservatives than with
[SPEAKER_06]: Now, I would like him just to answer that.
[SPEAKER_07]: Anyone can go online when they get home.
[SPEAKER_07]: Go and see how much it will cost to convert your home.
[SPEAKER_07]: Go and see how much it will cost to install the heat pump.
[SPEAKER_07]: Go and see how much it will cost to change your car.
[SPEAKER_07]: Those are all the things that he's going to force you to do sooner than is necessary.
[SPEAKER_07]: You can go and see tonight the thousands of pounds that's going to cost you.
[SPEAKER_07]: I said it before, I'll say it again.
[SPEAKER_07]: He is going to put up your taxes, put up your bills as clear as night follows day.
[SPEAKER_16]: I'm going to just return very briefly to Claire's question.
[SPEAKER_16]: She's talking about a climate catastrophe now.
[SPEAKER_16]: What are you doing to put climate at the very centre of your policies?
[SPEAKER_16]: Very briefly.
[SPEAKER_06]: I want to set up Great British Energy.
[SPEAKER_06]: This is a publicly owned company that will generate energy, that will have investment alongside it.
[SPEAKER_06]: It'll be owned by the taxpayer, making money for the taxpayer, and drive us to renewables so that we can have lower bills,
[SPEAKER_06]: secure energy and the jobs of the future.
[SPEAKER_06]: I also think that we should insulate our houses because I think people are paying far too much in their bills.
[SPEAKER_06]: And that was a project that was started 10 years ago and cancelled under the Conservatives when they said cut the green crap.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've lost 10 years.
[SPEAKER_06]: Get on with it and get your bills down.
[SPEAKER_06]: Because people are fed up with energy bills that have gone through the roof.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed for that.
[SPEAKER_16]: We've got another question.
[SPEAKER_16]: A very important question from Miles from Ilford for both of you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Now, hey, Miles.
[SPEAKER_01]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_01]: Like many young people, I completed my final years of sixth form under Covid restrictions, started university under them, and I've had to deal with a cost-of-living crisis, a housing crisis and an unstable world.
[SPEAKER_01]: What future can you offer my generation and when will we become your priority?
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed, Kirsten.
[SPEAKER_06]: Miles, what I think is really important is that you have the further education opportunities that you need, whether that's university or technical skills, I think either are perfectly, they're equivalent, they're really important.
[SPEAKER_06]: My dad was a toolmaker, so he went down the skills route.
[SPEAKER_06]: I was the first, as it happens in my family, to go to university.
[SPEAKER_06]: So we would ensure that those jobs are there for you for the future, that you have the opportunity to get on.
[SPEAKER_06]: will build the houses, so you don't have to be, what, 30-something, 35, 36 before you own a house under this government.
[SPEAKER_06]: But what I won't be doing, I won't be doing, is sending you on national service, some sort of teenage dad's army, which would be what the Prime Minister would say.
[SPEAKER_06]: Forget going on to university.
[SPEAKER_06]: He wants to send you off to do national service.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: You know, we have an enormous amount to be proud of as a country, but we do need to do more to make sure our young people, like you, Miles, get the opportunities that they deserve.
[SPEAKER_07]: So that's why we will introduce a modern form of national service.
[SPEAKER_07]: And I think it's going to be transformational for young people in our country, giving them the skills.
[SPEAKER_07]: and opportunities they need to succeed in life, fostering a culture of service in our society, bringing it together, but also strengthening our resilience and security for the future.
[SPEAKER_07]: And I think it is going to be something that's incredibly positive.
[SPEAKER_07]: But beyond that, I want you to have financial security.
[SPEAKER_07]: So when you get that job, when you save for that house, we make it easier, which is why I want to keep cutting your taxes so you can keep more of your money, build for a deposit for that first house, and not saddle you with £2,000 of higher taxes.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed, Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer called the National Service proposals a teenage dad's army.
[SPEAKER_16]: What would you say to that, Rishi Sunak?
[SPEAKER_16]: Tell him why you don't think it's that.
[SPEAKER_07]: Whatever you might think of it, it is an idea that's transformational for our society.
[SPEAKER_07]: Well, the army don't like it.
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer, all he can do is sneer at it.
[SPEAKER_07]: Sneer at it, because you don't have any ideas for the future.
[SPEAKER_07]: You don't have anything that's bold that's going to transform our country for the better.
[SPEAKER_07]: And in fact, everywhere I've been since I've made the announcement, I've had people talking to me about how they think it will be wonderful for their children, how they think it will change our country for the better.
[SPEAKER_07]: And it's an example of the bold action that I'm prepared to take to do things differently to deliver a more secure future.
[SPEAKER_07]: You don't have big ideas like that.
[SPEAKER_06]: They've been in power for 14 years, and after 14 years, with a few weeks to go before the election, they come out with this desperate idea.
[SPEAKER_06]: If it's such a brilliant idea, why for 14 years has your government not lifted a finger to do it?
[SPEAKER_06]: It's a desperate attempt, now the election's being called, to get some attention and put something on the table.
[SPEAKER_06]: The other thing I would say is this.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's very important, Miles, is that the money the Prime Minister says he's going to use for this national service, he's going to take away from levelling up.
[SPEAKER_06]: Remember that promise in 2019, we're going to level up?
[SPEAKER_06]: Well, now he's going to use the money for national service, and the army say, and the military say, this isn't going to help us because we don't have the wherewithal to train people, and it'll take away from our own budget.
[SPEAKER_06]: Allow Rishi Sunak to respond very specifically.
[SPEAKER_06]: It's not thought through, it's not sensible, it's desperate.
[SPEAKER_16]: Could you respond very specifically on those points?
[SPEAKER_07]: Actually, having spoken to lots of people from the armed forces, they're very supportive of the plan, and they think it will do brilliance for them over time to attract people into the armed forces.
[SPEAKER_07]: And actually, the money that we spend on levelling up is partly spent.
[SPEAKER_07]: spreading skills and opportunities for young people, and I think this is the best way to do it.
[SPEAKER_07]: But again, you've had 14 years, 14 years with nothing to do but think about the future, but you have nothing to say about it, and all you can do is talk about the past.
[SPEAKER_07]: And it's clear, there are no big ideas here.
[SPEAKER_07]: If we want to transform our country for the better and deliver a secure future, you've got to have leaders who are prepared to do big, bold things, and I am, and you just don't have anything to offer.
[SPEAKER_06]: On the one hand, he says, these are all the big ideas that Keir Starmer's coming up with, and they'll cost a fortune.
[SPEAKER_06]: Then he says he hasn't got any big ideas.
[SPEAKER_06]: I do appreciate why he doesn't want to talk about the last 14 years.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's ashamed of the last 14 years.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's not said tonight in this debate one thing, saying, this is our proud record, vote for me because we've got a great record.
[SPEAKER_06]: He can't say that.
[SPEAKER_06]: He can't say, vote for Conservatives who have got great leaders, burnt through five prime ministers.
[SPEAKER_06]: So all he can do is say, please look at the future.
[SPEAKER_06]: Please don't look at what we've done in the last 14 years.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: We cannot have five more years of this.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've got to draw a line.
[SPEAKER_06]: We've got to turn a page and start the press with Labour.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_16]: Miles is listening very patiently to all of this, and I want to root this in his question, whatever the to and fro on that issue may have been between the two of you.
[SPEAKER_16]: You're both homeowners.
[SPEAKER_16]: The most common living arrangement for 18- to 34-year-olds is living with their parents.
[SPEAKER_16]: Do the young need to change their expectations of home ownership now?
[SPEAKER_16]: Do we have to be realistic about this?
[SPEAKER_16]: The young people of this country deserve some honesty.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Yeah, it is too hard to own your own home, and I want everyone to feel what I experienced when I got the keys to my first flat, because it's a very special feeling, and we need to make it easier.
[SPEAKER_07]: And that's why we've delivered a million homes in this Parliament, and we'll keep building homes in the right place, but not concreting over the countryside, as Labour would do.
[SPEAKER_07]: But crucially, we need to make it easy for you to save for that deposit.
[SPEAKER_07]: And that's why I want your hard work to be rewarded.
[SPEAKER_07]: I don't think we should be taxing you more, because that's just going to make it even harder for you to get on the property ladder.
[SPEAKER_07]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: Keir Starmer, on this specific point,
[SPEAKER_06]: I think what you raise is really important, because for young people, the dream of home ownership is all but gone.
[SPEAKER_06]: The average age for owning a home now, Miles, is late 30s.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's shocking, because I know what your own roof over your head means for an individual.
[SPEAKER_06]: It meant the world to me when I was growing up.
[SPEAKER_06]: So we will build 1.5 million homes, picking a number
[SPEAKER_06]: requires a plan.
[SPEAKER_06]: And if those homes are going to be built, we're going to have to change the planning laws to make sure we can get on with it.
[SPEAKER_06]: We're going to have to make sure our mayors and combined authorities have the powers they need to put the homes in the places.
[SPEAKER_06]: And we need to make sure the amenities are there, the schools, the health clubs, et cetera, to support those homes.
[SPEAKER_06]: So we've got a clear plan to deliver on the homes that will make sure, Myles, that you get that chance for the dream far earlier than you do under this failed government.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed.
[SPEAKER_16]: There was so much that was in the question from Miles.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed for that.
[SPEAKER_16]: And we're just going to come now to a final quickfire question.
[SPEAKER_16]: It's been a pretty serious evening in terms of what we've discussed so far.
[SPEAKER_16]: Just to both of you, apparently there is another big contest on this summer.
[SPEAKER_16]: For many, it's the biggest contest, and that is, of course, the Euros.
[SPEAKER_16]: We know you're both football fans.
[SPEAKER_16]: You are not the only leaders under pressure to win and sometimes accused of not being exciting enough.
[SPEAKER_16]: So here, slightly with my tongue in cheek, if you'll forgive me, both of you, is a question that we've literally just had in from Gareth, who's on his way to Germany.
[SPEAKER_16]: What is the best leadership approach?
[SPEAKER_16]: Play it safe or take some risks and go for the win?
[SPEAKER_16]: What would be your leadership style?
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak, quickly.
[SPEAKER_07]: Well, not to give advice to Gareth Southgate, who, when I met him, we did discuss who had the worst job in Britain in terms of other people giving you their opinions.
[SPEAKER_07]: But, Isa, you need to have a clear plan and you need to take bold action, because you don't do anything without those things.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much, Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_06]: Keir Starmer, briefly... Game plan, good squad, and he's got both of those.
[SPEAKER_06]: I really think England are going to do really well this year.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's got a fantastic team and I'm really... Are you radical or do you play it safe?
[SPEAKER_06]: Sorry?
[SPEAKER_06]: You need a strategy for winning, so it depends who you're playing, what the issue is.
[SPEAKER_06]: That's what Gareth does.
[SPEAKER_06]: He's very, very good at this.
[SPEAKER_06]: And he's built a squad.
[SPEAKER_06]: OK. And just like I've got a brilliant Cabinet.
[SPEAKER_16]: OK, thank you very much, gentlemen, for both of those answers on the footy.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_16]: And we go now to the candidates' closing statements.
[SPEAKER_16]: First of all, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_06]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_06]: I don't offer you the gimmicks or unfunded promises that Rishi Sunak does.
[SPEAKER_06]: I don't pretend there's a magic wand that will fix everything overnight.
[SPEAKER_06]: Instead, I offer a practical, common-sense plan to change Britain.
[SPEAKER_06]: This election is about who our country works for.
[SPEAKER_06]: The simple patriotic belief that Britain can be better and must be better.
[SPEAKER_06]: Imagine how you would feel waking up on July the 5th to five more years of the Conservatives.
[SPEAKER_06]: Five more years of decline and division.
[SPEAKER_06]: The arsonists handed back the matches.
[SPEAKER_06]: Now imagine turning the page with a Labour government that rolls up its sleeves and gets on with the job.
[SPEAKER_06]: That puts the country back in your service.
[SPEAKER_06]: The choice at this election is clear.
[SPEAKER_06]: More chaos with the Conservatives, or the chance to rebuild Britain with a changed Labour Party.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_07]: Either Keir Starmer or I will be your Prime Minister, and a vote for anyone else makes it more likely that it will be him.
[SPEAKER_07]: Agree or disagree with me, you know what I stand for.
[SPEAKER_07]: I'll always have your back, as I did with Furlough.
[SPEAKER_07]: But with Keir Starmer, apart from higher taxes, you don't know what you'd get, and neither does he.
[SPEAKER_07]: And we've heard a lot about change from him, but change to what?
[SPEAKER_07]: Keir Starmer is asking you to hand him a blank cheque when he hasn't said what he'll buy with it or how much it's going to cost you.
[SPEAKER_07]: In uncertain times, we simply cannot afford an uncertain prime minister.
[SPEAKER_07]: If you don't know what you're going to get with Labour,
[SPEAKER_07]: Don't vote for it.
[SPEAKER_07]: On the 4th of July, choose lower immigration, lower taxes and protected pensions.
[SPEAKER_07]: Choose a secure future with the Conservatives.
[SPEAKER_16]: Thank you very much indeed, Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_16]: Well, that's it.
[SPEAKER_16]: Quite a night.
[SPEAKER_16]: We've come to the end of our debate.
[SPEAKER_16]: You've heard from Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer head-to-head tonight.
[SPEAKER_16]: You can also hear what other parties standing in this year's general election have to offer in the ITV election interviews with Anushka Asthana, coming up next.
[SPEAKER_16]: The conversation will continue, not just here, on ITV, on our national and regional news.
[SPEAKER_16]: And next Thursday, guests will be back to host ITV's seven-party election debate.
[SPEAKER_16]: And then, in just over four weeks, you ultimately get to decide who runs the country.
[SPEAKER_16]: From all of us here in Salford, good night.
[SPEAKER_15]: You've just seen Sunat versus Starmer, the Conservative and Labour Party leaders talking policy and making their pitches for power in the 2024 election.
[SPEAKER_15]: Now, with the future of the country at stake, we have four more parties who also want your vote.
[SPEAKER_15]: Welcome to the ITV election interviews.
[SPEAKER_15]: Good evening.
[SPEAKER_15]: I'm Anushka Asthana.
[SPEAKER_15]: Tonight, Rishi Sunak and Keir Starmer came face to face, asking you to trust them to run the country.
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, in the next hour, the Liberal Democrats, the SNP, Reform UK, and the Green Party will be giving their pitch for power and talking policy.
[SPEAKER_15]: Will they persuade you that they are a better choice for the future?
[SPEAKER_15]: First up, we'll chat to Sir Ed Davey, fighting his first election as Lib Dem leader.
[SPEAKER_15]: The SNP's leader in Westminster, Stephen Flynn, is here.
[SPEAKER_15]: Waiting in the wings is Richard Tice, leader till yesterday, now chair of Reform UK.
[SPEAKER_15]: And we'll be speaking to the co-leader of the Green Party, Adrian Ramsey.
[SPEAKER_15]: we'll hear their vision of the future and get their response to tonight's debate.
[SPEAKER_15]: Before we speak to Sir Ed Davey, here's a flavour of what the Liberal Democrats stand for.
[SPEAKER_19]: we could get the fair deal that people so deserve.
[SPEAKER_15]: Liberal Democrat leader Ed Davey is one of the longest serving politicians to lead a party this election.
[SPEAKER_15]: He served in the Conservative Lib Dem coalition government in 2010, but this time the Lib Dems have ruled out an election pact with the Tories at least.
[SPEAKER_15]: Instead, the party is targeting Conservative heartlands, eyeing up the constituencies of several cabinet ministers.
[SPEAKER_15]: Buoyed by recent by-election victories, can they increase their representation in the House of Commons?
[SPEAKER_15]: It is not always easy for smaller parties to grab attention, which might explain this.
[SPEAKER_15]: And this.
[SPEAKER_15]: Ed Davey said this was an attempt to bring attention to Britain's polluted waterways.
[SPEAKER_15]: A key election issue for the Lib Dems, alongside recruiting more GPs in a campaign under the slogan, for a fair deal.
[SPEAKER_15]: But with only 15 MPs in the last parliament, can Ed Davey turn the Liberal Democrats back into the political force it once was?
[SPEAKER_15]: And here is the Liberal Democrat leader himself, Sir Ed Davey.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's get straight to it.
[SPEAKER_15]: What is your pitch to voters in a minute?
[SPEAKER_02]: Nushka, our country desperately needs change.
[SPEAKER_02]: From the NHS crisis, to the cost-living crisis, to the sewage in our rivers, nothing seems to work properly anymore.
[SPEAKER_02]: Families across the UK are working hard, raising their families, looking after loved ones.
[SPEAKER_02]: They deserve a fair deal.
[SPEAKER_02]: And every vote for the Liberal Democrats in this election
[SPEAKER_02]: is a vote for a local champion who's going to fight for that fair deal.
[SPEAKER_02]: So people can see a GP or a dentist when they need one.
[SPEAKER_02]: So we value care and properly support carers, whether they're care workers or family carers.
[SPEAKER_02]: And so mortgages and rents aren't so high that families are terrified of losing their home and young people can't get one.
[SPEAKER_02]: and, crucially, a fair deal where we transform British politics so we can get this real change.
[SPEAKER_02]: Only the Liberal Democrats are fighting for that fair deal.
[SPEAKER_15]: And you are promising a lot.
[SPEAKER_15]: You say you're going to recruit more GPs, insulate people's homes.
[SPEAKER_15]: You're offering free personal care for the elderly, investing in renewables.
[SPEAKER_15]: You're putting a billion pounds, you say, into agriculture.
[SPEAKER_15]: Where's all the money coming from?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, we're going to publish our manifesto very shortly.
[SPEAKER_02]: It's going to be fully costed, as it always is.
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, you can give me some examples, then.
[SPEAKER_02]: Yeah, I'm really happy to do that.
[SPEAKER_02]: Today, for example, we launched our policies for free personal care and for a higher minimum wage for care workers of £2 extra an hour to try to get more people into care, because that's desperately needed.
[SPEAKER_02]: And we've shown where the money will come from.
[SPEAKER_02]: We're saying that the tax cuts the Conservatives have given to the big banks should be reversed.
[SPEAKER_02]: That would raise £4.3 billion a year.
[SPEAKER_02]: Let me just take those figures though.
[SPEAKER_15]: When I speak to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, they say that actually in net terms, taxes on banks haven't gone up that much.
[SPEAKER_15]: Some taxes have gone up, some have gone down.
[SPEAKER_15]: They say that your idea of taxing share buybacks, you say that would get you £1.4 billion.
[SPEAKER_15]: They say because of the way people will change their behaviour, it will get them next to nothing.
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, I disagree with that.
[SPEAKER_02]: You disagree with the IFS?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, I'd like to see their workings.
[SPEAKER_02]: I can show them ours.
[SPEAKER_02]: We showed that last year, if we'd had this share buyback scheme, it would have raised 2.3 billion, actually.
[SPEAKER_02]: And we've allowed for behavioural change.
[SPEAKER_02]: And in fact, what we're looking at is what President Joe Biden did in the United States.
[SPEAKER_02]: They raised a huge amount of money for this approach.
[SPEAKER_02]: So we can raise money.
[SPEAKER_02]: We've got other sources of raising money.
[SPEAKER_02]: We've got a proposal, for example, to make sure that there's a mental health expert in every primary and secondary school to deal with the problems of mental health for our children and young people.
[SPEAKER_02]: And we've said that the digital service tax on the social media giants and Amazon and Google, that should go up to raise the money.
[SPEAKER_02]: But Nushka, this is really important.
[SPEAKER_15]: No, it is important that a group like the IFS is not as convinced about the sums.
[SPEAKER_15]: And I guess we will continue to challenge them as they go along.
[SPEAKER_15]: But I want to ask you about a policy I know you were passionate about.
[SPEAKER_15]: When you were in coalition government, you were passionate about raising the salary level at which people start paying tax.
[SPEAKER_15]: Now, that threshold has been frozen.
[SPEAKER_15]: And it's basically a massive tax increase for people.
[SPEAKER_15]: I assume, if you have the power, you would immediately reverse that.
[SPEAKER_02]: We'd like to, but you're right, and other people like the IFS are right, the money isn't there to do everything we want.
[SPEAKER_02]: So you couldn't do that?
[SPEAKER_02]: So when we publish our manifesto you'll see that actually raising that is a priority when the public finances allow.
[SPEAKER_15]: But you admit they don't allow that now?
[SPEAKER_15]: Not immediately, no.
[SPEAKER_15]: So that is an unfair tax that you wouldn't be able to change?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, what we showed when we were in government, we massively raised it.
[SPEAKER_02]: We promised to do that, and when resources allowed, we did it massively.
[SPEAKER_02]: And what's been so unfair, and there's a huge difference between us and the Conservatives, who really aren't fit to govern our country, you know.
[SPEAKER_02]: They've raised taxes on the lowest income people.
[SPEAKER_02]: We cut taxes on the lowest income people.
[SPEAKER_15]: But right now, you're not saying that you'd be able to commit to that.
[SPEAKER_15]: You're saying in the future, you would be able to commit to it.
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, we want to do that, but let's be clear Anushka, the Conservatives have ruined our economy, Liz Truss's budget has trashed it, and so we can't do everything we want to in the first instance.
[SPEAKER_02]: We've got a set of priorities and they are costed.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let me just ask you one other thing that you talk about.
[SPEAKER_15]: You want more safe routes for asylum seekers.
[SPEAKER_15]: What numbers do you think we should be accepting?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, as time-seekers, you can't be absolutely sure of the numbers because it depends on what's happening in other parts of the world.
[SPEAKER_02]: What we have said is we need to make sure we go after those international criminal gangs who are trafficking human beings and stop it at source.
[SPEAKER_02]: And then, when working with the UN and other countries, take our share of refugees.
[SPEAKER_15]: Have you thought about what a fair share is?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, we'd have to work with other countries.
[SPEAKER_15]: But you don't have a rough number?
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, we gave refugee status to 38,000 people last year.
[SPEAKER_15]: Are you saying it should be higher than that?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, because the flow of refugees changes from year to year, depending on what's happening around the world.
[SPEAKER_02]: I think everyone knows that.
[SPEAKER_02]: But if you look at asylum immigration, and it's a very serious issue,
[SPEAKER_02]: We think it has completely failed the system and part of the reason is because they haven't taken the measures back here which would reduce the demand for workers.
[SPEAKER_02]: Let me give you one that is really important.
[SPEAKER_02]: They have issued over 300,000 health care visas in the last two or three years.
[SPEAKER_02]: We have said why don't you pay care workers properly by an extra £2 an hour?
[SPEAKER_02]: Then people would move from... That's more to add into the spending bucket.
[SPEAKER_15]: You're talking about net legal migration, I was talking about people claiming asylum.
[SPEAKER_15]: I want to ask you a few quickfire questions if you don't mind.
[SPEAKER_15]: If there is a hung parliament, do you think you'd be Deputy Prime Minister?
[SPEAKER_02]: I'm focused on getting our Liberal Democrat policies over so we can get lots of Liberal Democrat tuition fees.
[SPEAKER_02]: That's not a no.
[SPEAKER_02]: Listen, I'm here.
[SPEAKER_02]: I'm enjoying being on your programme so I can get our Liberal Democrat policies over.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you think tuition fees should be scrapped?
[SPEAKER_02]: No, what we do think... Wow, you're not going to one word.
[SPEAKER_02]: No, no, no, no.
[SPEAKER_02]: What we're trying to do is to make sure we get maintenance grants for students.
[SPEAKER_02]: OK. Students from poor backgrounds need to be able to go to university.
[SPEAKER_02]: OK, but no.
[SPEAKER_02]: And the Tories scrap that.
[SPEAKER_15]: Key phase, would you welcome Donald Trump to Britain if he wins the presidency?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, I don't share any of the values and policies of the President Trump, nor do the Liberal Democrats.
[SPEAKER_02]: However, if he's elected by the people...
[SPEAKER_15]: When it's got however in it, it's definitely not one word.
[SPEAKER_02]: Yeah, but sometimes, Anoushka, some of the questions are a bit more complicated than yes and no.
[SPEAKER_02]: I think we all know that.
[SPEAKER_02]: So you would if he was president?
[SPEAKER_02]: Listen, America is one of our closest allies, and you have to respect whoever they elect.
[SPEAKER_15]: OK.
[SPEAKER_15]: Most people would have seen tonight's head-to-head between Keir Starmer and Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_15]: Who did you think won?
[SPEAKER_02]: Listen, people can make up their own mind about that.
[SPEAKER_02]: I'm determined to talk about Liberal Democrat policies.
[SPEAKER_02]: I didn't think you've got a lot of answers there.
[SPEAKER_02]: Take the cost of living, for example, what they're going to do about it.
[SPEAKER_02]: We're clear.
[SPEAKER_02]: Let's get free school meals to children from the poorest backgrounds.
[SPEAKER_02]: Let's help people with the energy bill through the Warm Home Discount.
[SPEAKER_02]: Let's make sure children who are living in poverty, the universal priority.
[SPEAKER_15]: OK. Let's talk about your priorities.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's talk about your priorities.
[SPEAKER_15]: In a recent poll, it says you could get almost 50 MPs.
[SPEAKER_15]: In that situation, you could be a power broker in the next election, which I'm sure brings a smile to your face.
[SPEAKER_15]: If so, we know you wouldn't do a deal with the Conservatives.
[SPEAKER_15]: But if Labour look to you and say, prop up Keir Starmer in power, what would be your demand?
[SPEAKER_15]: What's most important to the Lib Dems?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, it's interesting in that poll that you're quoting there, because Labour would have a majority in that poll.
[SPEAKER_02]: But listen, in this election, I'm focused in on Liberal Democrat policies.
[SPEAKER_02]: And I said when I became leader of the party that my job was to get rid of as many Conservative MPs as possible.
[SPEAKER_02]: They have ruined our country.
[SPEAKER_02]: And I'm quite angry, actually.
[SPEAKER_02]: And I think lots of voters are.
[SPEAKER_02]: What's really interesting in this election, I've never seen it before in my 30 years in politics.
[SPEAKER_02]: So you would work with Keir Starmer to get rid of the Tories?
[SPEAKER_02]: I am focusing on defeating Conservative MPs this election.
[SPEAKER_02]: I hope to defeat a Labour MP in Sheffield Hallam, actually, and some SNP MPs.
[SPEAKER_02]: But the truth is, the vast majority of chances to elect Liberal Democrat MPs, local champions for the area, is by defeating Conservative MPs.
[SPEAKER_15]: Just to press you on this point, though, the most likely way in which you would exert influence in a future government is if it's a hung parliament and if you are able to support the government.
[SPEAKER_15]: So I do think it's really important that our voters understand your red lines, your priorities.
[SPEAKER_02]: What I'm saying is, vote Liberal Democrat, you'll get a local champion who will go to Westminster and argue for Liberal Democrat policies.
[SPEAKER_02]: Let me give you an example where, even in this Parliament, where we weren't government, a Liberal Democrat MP, Wendy Chamberlain, the fantastic MP for North East Fife, changed the law for carers by giving them unpaid carers leave.
[SPEAKER_02]: something that the Conservative promised but failed to deliver.
[SPEAKER_02]: It was a Liberal Democrat who did that in this Parliament that's just ending.
[SPEAKER_02]: You elect a Liberal Democrat, you will get a local champion who will fight for your area and will go to Westminster...
[SPEAKER_02]: So you won't say anything on what would be your number one?
[SPEAKER_02]: I'm fighting on this election on the Liberal Democrat manifesto.
[SPEAKER_02]: I'm looking forward to publishing it.
[SPEAKER_02]: We've been giving you a number of our proposals, whether it's more GPs, whether it's more carers, whether it's tackling the sewage crisis.
[SPEAKER_02]: These are the priorities for, I think, for the country.
[SPEAKER_02]: When we talk to voters...
[SPEAKER_15]: They're not different to Labour's priorities in many of those cases.
[SPEAKER_15]: So the question is, would you want voting reform, for example?
[SPEAKER_02]: Well, you'll be really shocked by this.
[SPEAKER_15]: The one word answer, yes.
[SPEAKER_02]: Liberal Democrats want to reform our political system.
[SPEAKER_02]: That includes electoral reform.
[SPEAKER_15]: PR, yes.
[SPEAKER_15]: I don't have much time left, so I do want to ask you this.
[SPEAKER_15]: You have been shooting down water slides in a rubber ring.
[SPEAKER_15]: It's not necessarily the best look if you want to be serious in government.
[SPEAKER_02]: Look, I think that politicians, I believe that politicians should be serious about voters' concerns and show how they're going to address this.
[SPEAKER_02]: I've tried to do an hour interview.
[SPEAKER_02]: But I don't think politicians should always take themselves too seriously.
[SPEAKER_02]: I think people want to know that politicians are real people with real life experience.
[SPEAKER_02]: And I think I've got that.
[SPEAKER_15]: So more rubber rings, more Jenga, more paddle boards.
[SPEAKER_02]: Do you know, they never tell me the stunts until about a few hours beforehand.
[SPEAKER_15]: All right, well, we look forward to that.
[SPEAKER_15]: Sir Ed Davey, thank you very much for joining me.
[SPEAKER_15]: Right, next up, we're going to speak to the SNP leader in Westminster, Stephen Flynn.
[SPEAKER_15]: But first, let's take a look at what the Scottish National Party have got to offer.
[SPEAKER_17]: We are for Scotland.
[SPEAKER_17]: We will always put Scotland first.
[SPEAKER_15]: Stephen Flynn has been the SNP's star man in Westminster since December 2022, playing a key role in the party's UK-wide aspirations.
[SPEAKER_15]: The SNP is the party of government in Scotland and until this election was called the third biggest party in the House of Commons with 43 MPs.
[SPEAKER_15]: Its latest leader, John Swinney, promised to restart conversations about Scottish independence soon after taking the top job.
[SPEAKER_15]: But some say the party faces an uphill battle.
[SPEAKER_15]: Swinney took the helm in May following the collapse of the SNP's power-sharing deal with the Scottish Greens.
[SPEAKER_15]: That, plus an ongoing police investigation into the party's finances, have cast a shadow over the SNP in recent months.
[SPEAKER_15]: Beyond fighting for independence, the party has aims to increase investment in green energy, affordable housing and the NHS.
[SPEAKER_15]: The SNP says it will target Tory-held seats in Scotland.
[SPEAKER_15]: But with the Conservatives, Labour and the Lib Dems targeting SNP seats, will the party be able to maintain their dominance in Westminster seats north of the border?
[SPEAKER_15]: Stephen Flynn, SNP Westminster leader, is with me.
[SPEAKER_15]: Welcome.
[SPEAKER_15]: Why don't you kick us off with that one-minute pitch to voters?
[SPEAKER_18]: Yes, well, the good news is that this Tory government is coming to an end.
[SPEAKER_18]: And thanks to Rishi Sunak, that date is coming sooner than many people had predicted.
[SPEAKER_18]: So the choice for voters in Scotland is now very simple.
[SPEAKER_18]: Who do they trust to put Scotland's interests first?
[SPEAKER_18]: at Westminster.
[SPEAKER_18]: For the SNP, we are very clear about what it is that we believe in.
[SPEAKER_18]: We believe in investment in our NHS, we believe in action on the cost of living crisis, we believe in rejoining the European single market, on ensuring that we create economic growth by delivering net zero.
[SPEAKER_18]: Within the Palace of Westminster, those policies are not particularly popular and they are not shared
[SPEAKER_18]: by the Labour Party.
[SPEAKER_18]: But we're not here to cosy up to the Westminster status quo.
[SPEAKER_18]: We're here to deliver for the people of Scotland and to ensure that they have a say over their own future.
[SPEAKER_18]: So on the 4th of July, I would urge people to vote for what they believe in, to vote SNP to put Scotland's interests first.
[SPEAKER_15]: And let me ask you about the issue of independence, the clues in the name of the party.
[SPEAKER_15]: Your former leader, Nicola Sturgeon, made clear that this was the next big chance for Scottish voters to have their say on that issue.
[SPEAKER_15]: She was clear this is a de facto referendum on independence.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you still agree with that?
[SPEAKER_18]: Well, as you know, that's not the case.
[SPEAKER_18]: That's not been the party policy for a considerable period of time.
[SPEAKER_18]: What we would seek to do through this election is to win a majority of seats in Scotland, and then seek to enter discussions with the UK government following that.
[SPEAKER_18]: The big question there, of course, is for, likely, Keir Starmer to determine whether he's going to respect the democratic will of the people of Scotland or not, or whether he's going to copy Boris Johnson, Liz Truss, and Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_15]: And I'll just come to that.
[SPEAKER_15]: But why has that position changed?
[SPEAKER_15]: Because the big difference I see from when Nicola Sturgeon said that to when you dropped that is the difference in the polls.
[SPEAKER_15]: You were more confident about getting a majority back then, and you're less confident now.
[SPEAKER_18]: I think the reason that that position changed, and in fairness it wasn't actually agreed by the party, it was Nicola's position, it wasn't the party's position.
[SPEAKER_18]: The reason it changed is that because in order to achieve independence you have to have a referendum, you have to have
[SPEAKER_18]: the gold standard, which is recognised by our friends and allies in Europe, of course, who we want to join as an independent European nation.
[SPEAKER_18]: That's why the party took a pragmatic decision to say that when we win the election in Scotland, which I believe we will, we will win a majority of seats in Scotland, we can therefore have discussions with the UK government to put that into democratic effect.
[SPEAKER_18]: And it's for the UK government and Keir Starmer to outline whether he's going to respect Scotland's democracy or not.
[SPEAKER_15]: What if you don't win?
[SPEAKER_15]: If you don't get a majority, your colleague Tommy Sheppard is really clear.
[SPEAKER_15]: His words, not mine.
[SPEAKER_15]: If the SNP lose the election in Scotland, the debate on independence stops.
[SPEAKER_18]: And this is the question that the people of Scotland have to address.
[SPEAKER_18]: So that's right.
[SPEAKER_15]: The debate on independence stops if you don't get a majority.
[SPEAKER_18]: So democracy does not stop a single election, but for the people of Scotland, 50% of whom believe in independence, they have to determine whether they want to vote for a party who will put the NHS first, action on the cost of living, rejoining the European single market, and of course seeking to develop net zero, and who also believe in Scotland having the right to determine its own future, or whether they want to vote for a unionist Labour party that doesn't want that to happen, that wants to stop Scotland's democracy.
[SPEAKER_15]: That is quite a frapposition to take.
[SPEAKER_15]: The polls are not looking good for you.
[SPEAKER_15]: You are basically putting it on the table there.
[SPEAKER_15]: I get it, because that is going to persuade voters who really want independence to vote for you, but aren't you taking a huge risk there?
[SPEAKER_18]: What we are saying is that democracy doesn't start and stop with one election.
[SPEAKER_18]: That has never been the case.
[SPEAKER_18]: If that was the case, we wouldn't be having an election here today.
[SPEAKER_18]: We are standing on a manifesto which is going to have a clear commitment
[SPEAKER_18]: to obviously have those discussions with the UK government, should we win that election.
[SPEAKER_18]: I'm confident that we will be able to, but the big question for the Unionist parties, and for Keir Starmer in particular, is whether he's going to follow the tact of Boris Johnson, Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss, and deny Scotland her democracy.
[SPEAKER_15]: Isn't one issue here that support for independence has actually remained similar to the past, 45%, but support for the SNP has fallen?
[SPEAKER_15]: People want independence as much as they did.
[SPEAKER_15]: They don't necessarily see you as the vehicle to get them there.
[SPEAKER_18]: I think what the people of Scotland want right now is to get rid of the Tories.
[SPEAKER_18]: The people of Scotland haven't voted Conservative since 1955, and they want to make sure there's not a Conservative government.
[SPEAKER_18]: But this election is, of course, about much more than that, because change has to look like something.
[SPEAKER_18]: We're clear about what change looks like to us.
[SPEAKER_18]: Investment in the NHS, action on the cost of living crisis, making sure that we rejoin the European single market, and, of course, delivering on net zero.
[SPEAKER_18]: The Labour Party do not agree with those things.
[SPEAKER_18]: We can hold their feet to the fire.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let me come back on those, but I would like to just ask you a few quickfire questions.
[SPEAKER_15]: Of course.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's see if you're quicker than Davey.
[SPEAKER_15]: I'll try my best.
[SPEAKER_15]: Would there be a hard border between England and an independent Scotland?
[SPEAKER_15]: No.
[SPEAKER_15]: When Scotland is not playing, will you support England in the Euros?
[SPEAKER_15]: Will Donald Trump be welcome in Scotland if he wins the election?
[SPEAKER_18]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_15]: You just watched the head-to-head debate between Keir Starmer and Rishi Sunak.
[SPEAKER_15]: Who do you think won?
[SPEAKER_18]: I don't think the people of Scotland won because I don't think Scotland was mentioned once.
[SPEAKER_15]: OK. And you've made very, very clear that you think the worst thing for Scotland is a Conservative government.
[SPEAKER_15]: won't Scottish voters think, if we don't want a Conservative government, we need to vote Labour?
[SPEAKER_18]: So, as all the opinion polls would indicate, Keir Starmer is going to be the next Prime Minister, which is why, at this election, the choice for the people of Scotland is very... Well, listen, in an election campaign, we don't necessarily think about opinion polls.
[SPEAKER_15]: They need to win 123 extra seats.
[SPEAKER_15]: If they can win 25 seats in Scotland, it's going to make their path easier.
[SPEAKER_18]: You've seen the same polls as I have that put the Labour majority well into the three figures, if not close to 200.
[SPEAKER_18]: So the people of Scotland have a choice to make.
[SPEAKER_18]: Who do they think is going to best stand up for Scotland's interests in Westminster?
[SPEAKER_18]: And it's the SNP who will do that.
[SPEAKER_18]: That is our USP.
[SPEAKER_18]: It's what we do.
[SPEAKER_18]: We put Scotland's interests first, growing Scotland's economy, delivering for our public services, and making sure that we can decide our own future.
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, you might try and reject this because of the polling.
[SPEAKER_15]: But if there is a hung parliament, that's a position in which you would have a very strong part.
[SPEAKER_15]: Would you do a deal with Keir Starmer?
[SPEAKER_15]: And if so, what would you demand?
[SPEAKER_18]: I think it's pretty obvious what a Scottish nationalist would demand.
[SPEAKER_15]: So the Labour Party wouldn't give you that.
[SPEAKER_15]: Is there something else that you would agree to do a deal over?
[SPEAKER_18]: So what I've outlined there is quite clear.
[SPEAKER_18]: Now, I have in recent days proposed a bill to prevent any privatisation of the NHS.
[SPEAKER_18]: The Labour Party were outraged at the very concept.
[SPEAKER_18]: If they wanted to back that, that would be most welcome.
[SPEAKER_18]: We would also want to see a rejection of the £18 billion worth of public sector cuts that are coming down the line.
[SPEAKER_18]: so that Scotland's public services could be funded properly.
[SPEAKER_18]: We want to see a rejoining of the European single market.
[SPEAKER_18]: We want those discussions to happen.
[SPEAKER_18]: It's good for business.
[SPEAKER_18]: We want to see increased migration.
[SPEAKER_15]: Your deficit would require cutting if you were going to do that.
[SPEAKER_18]: We want to see it.
[SPEAKER_15]: That would be austerity, wouldn't it?
[SPEAKER_18]: We want increased migration into Scotland because that's one of the ways you grow the economy.
[SPEAKER_15]: But just on that point on the single market.
[SPEAKER_18]: I'm afraid that you asked me what I would demand.
[SPEAKER_18]: I'm telling you what I would demand from a Keir Starmer government, which is progressive politics that align with the values of the people of Scotland.
[SPEAKER_18]: And of course, within that, we would want the powers to hold a referendum, because it is wrong that a Westminster parliament gets to determine our future and not the Scottish people's.
[SPEAKER_15]: And that is a list of policies that you wouldn't get in that situation, I think.
[SPEAKER_15]: And one of them you talked about was rejoining the single market.
[SPEAKER_15]: The European Union has very strict rules.
[SPEAKER_15]: Scotland's deficit is higher than the rules that would allow you to rejoin the EU, for example.
[SPEAKER_15]: Would you have to bring in pretty dire cuts to get to that position?
[SPEAKER_18]: Well, of course, you're predicting the future that Scotland's going to be independent.
[SPEAKER_18]: And I very much hope that's the case.
[SPEAKER_18]: And there's very many Eastern European nations which have joined the European Union whilst having a debt ratio
[SPEAKER_18]: and a deficit ratio, sorry, which is higher than that which is currently in place, as long as they have a plan in place to bring it down.
[SPEAKER_18]: And we would most certainly have a plan in place to bring it down.
[SPEAKER_18]: But we are the most pro-European party in Parliament, and we will stand true to our values.
[SPEAKER_15]: You have talked about other issues and the importance of other issues than independence, than the EU.
[SPEAKER_15]: A recent YouGov poll suggested around six out of 10 people in Scotland have little or no confidence that you'll make the right decisions on the economy, public services, police, climate change.
[SPEAKER_15]: What has led to this?
[SPEAKER_15]: catastrophic loss in trust and what can you do to regain that trust?
[SPEAKER_18]: Well I think we are in the process of regaining that trust as with John Swinney obviously as the Scottish National Party's leader with Kate Forbes at his side and with as many other talented ministers and just in recent days we've seen stats which have shown that when it comes to business confidence Scotland is the highest right across these aisles and that's on John Swinney's watch and that's the tone which is going to follow in Scotland for very many months to come because John Swinney is a serious politician.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you accept that there has been a catastrophic loss in trust?
[SPEAKER_18]: I believe that the SNP has had significant challenges and I accept those challenges and nobody would deny that.
[SPEAKER_18]: We're in the process of rebuilding that trust with the Scottish people and that starts with this general election where we can put their values first at Westminster.
[SPEAKER_15]: Just one thing that really has damaged trust is the fact that you're going to have to hand back 450 million pounds of EU money that you failed to spend on key economic and anti-poverty projects.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean would you apologise to voters for this?
[SPEAKER_18]: So as you know, the story which that refers to is money which, of course, runs until 2025.
[SPEAKER_18]: And what someone has done, purposely done, is take a snapshot of a moment in time.
[SPEAKER_18]: And as John Swinney outlined just the other day, he anticipates that that money will be spent.
[SPEAKER_18]: These are projects which were put on hold, as I understand it, due to the COVID pandemic.
[SPEAKER_15]: much higher percentage in Scotland than in Wales, England or Northern Ireland.
[SPEAKER_18]: But as the First Minister outlined, he anticipates that all of that money will be spent by 2025.
[SPEAKER_18]: Now I'm not entirely sure why we're in the business in serious politics of saying that a budget which hasn't been fully spent in 2024, which of course runs until 2025, is news.
[SPEAKER_18]: I don't think that does us any favours whatsoever in a serious grown-up discussion, particularly when families are living with the cost of living crisis at this moment in time and government expenditure is incredibly important.
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, I think that people feel upset about how and if that money will be spent.
[SPEAKER_18]: Yeah, but the explanation which has been provided by the Scottish Government is very clear.
[SPEAKER_18]: This budget runs until 2025.
[SPEAKER_18]: What's happened is someone has purposely taken a snapshot of 2024.
[SPEAKER_18]: And obviously, when we get to 2025, the First Minister has been very clear that he expects that money to be out the door.
[SPEAKER_15]: And just finally, let me ask you about that football decision.
[SPEAKER_15]: You didn't hesitate there.
[SPEAKER_15]: Why do you really not want to support England in other games?
[SPEAKER_18]: I'm a member of the Tartan Army.
[SPEAKER_18]: It's my hobby to go and watch Scotland play.
[SPEAKER_18]: We're rivals.
[SPEAKER_18]: I want to see Scotland do as well as we can in the Euros.
[SPEAKER_15]: Apparently, England and Scotland wouldn't even meet till the final.
[SPEAKER_18]: Well, England are not going to make it that far.
[SPEAKER_18]: So we'll just have to go there ourselves.
[SPEAKER_15]: I look forward to that Scottish final without England.
[SPEAKER_15]: Stephen Flynn, thank you so much.
[SPEAKER_15]: Coming up, we'll speak to Richard Tice, the new chair of Reform UK, and Green Party co-leader Adrian Ramsey.
[SPEAKER_15]: Can they persuade you to lend them your vote?
[SPEAKER_15]: All that after this short break.
[SPEAKER_15]: Welcome back to the ITV election interviews.
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, we've already heard from the SNP and the Lib Dems.
[SPEAKER_15]: The Green Party is coming up, but now it's time for Richard Tice, the new chair of Reform UK.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's take a quick look at their campaign promises.
[SPEAKER_08]: The right thing for the UK to go for growth, to go for higher wages, is actually to freeze immigration.
[SPEAKER_15]: Richard Tice is chair of Reform UK, the rebranded Brexit party hoping to cause a major political upset this election.
[SPEAKER_15]: And in the most dramatic moment of the campaign so far, Nigel Farage took the reins of the party from Tice, vowing to lead a political revolt and make reform the official opposition in the UK.
[SPEAKER_15]: They say a vote for them is a common sense choice, and they have four main aims.
[SPEAKER_15]: Lower taxes, what they call net zero migration,
[SPEAKER_15]: cheaper energy and no waiting lists for the NHS.
[SPEAKER_15]: Reform gained its first MP in March after Lee Anderson, the former Tory deputy chairman, defected.
[SPEAKER_15]: Richard Tice says he wants to smash and destroy the Tories on July 4th and with the party set to field a candidate in every seat across England, Wales and Scotland, will it hurt the Conservative vote?
[SPEAKER_15]: And joining me now, the man himself, Richard Tice, Chair of Reform UK.
[SPEAKER_15]: Welcome, Richard.
[SPEAKER_15]: Good evening.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's kick off with policy.
[SPEAKER_15]: Give me your pitch in a minute.
[SPEAKER_09]: This great country of ours, it's being so badly run at the moment.
[SPEAKER_09]: Everyone knows that we're all feeling worse off.
[SPEAKER_09]: It's harder to see a GP or get an operation.
[SPEAKER_09]: And our immigration system, legal and illegal, is completely and utterly out of control.
[SPEAKER_09]: It requires bold solutions to these serious problems and it's only Reform UK that has got these bold plans.
[SPEAKER_09]: Imagine not paying any income tax below £20,000.
[SPEAKER_09]: Imagine zero waiting lists within two years and keeping them there.
[SPEAKER_09]: We've got plans to achieve this and do this.
[SPEAKER_09]: And imagine freezing immigration so the country can catch up, that things can work properly.
[SPEAKER_09]: And imagine stopping the boats, stopping the deaths.
[SPEAKER_09]: We've got those bold plans, but it requires real successful people, achievers, doers, to fix the crisis, the problems this country's got.
[SPEAKER_09]: And if you're not happy with the status quo, if you want change, you've got to vote for change.
[SPEAKER_09]: You've got to vote Reform UK on July 4th.
[SPEAKER_15]: And I'll come to those policies.
[SPEAKER_15]: But let me just start with you.
[SPEAKER_15]: Yesterday, you were leader of Reform UK.
[SPEAKER_15]: And you were doing well.
[SPEAKER_15]: The party was 12% in the polls, above the Lib Dems, above the Greens.
[SPEAKER_15]: Who told you you were out as leader?
[SPEAKER_09]: I've been talking with Nigel about our plans for months and we've been doing well but we want to put turbo boosters, rocket boosters onto our campaign and that's what we've done.
[SPEAKER_09]: I'm delighted that Nigel's agreed both to stand, to lead the party and off we go.
[SPEAKER_09]: We're a successful team.
[SPEAKER_09]: In 2019 we won a national election with Mia's chair, with Nigel a leader.
[SPEAKER_09]: You must be a bit annoyed.
[SPEAKER_09]: I'm delighted that Nigel's getting stuck
[SPEAKER_09]: Got a bit embarrassed?
[SPEAKER_09]: Not at all.
[SPEAKER_09]: Look, we had 1,000 people in a constituency where Nigel's standing today in Clacton for his campaign launch.
[SPEAKER_09]: We're off.
[SPEAKER_15]: What's he got that you haven't then?
[SPEAKER_09]: Nigel's the most experienced, most well-known politician in the country.
[SPEAKER_09]: Together, we're making a rapid change.
[SPEAKER_09]: We're going up in the polls.
[SPEAKER_09]: Something is happening out there.
[SPEAKER_09]: It's very exciting.
[SPEAKER_09]: Voters have got a genuine different choice to socialism of the main two parties.
[SPEAKER_15]: And who calls the shots?
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, do you march to Nigel Farage's tune?
[SPEAKER_09]: We both discuss things, we debate things and we get to the right answer.
[SPEAKER_15]: It's a job share?
[SPEAKER_09]: No, it's a chairman share and a leader.
[SPEAKER_15]: Who's the bigger figure?
[SPEAKER_09]: We focus on action and solutions, not titles and nonsense like that.
[SPEAKER_09]: All the media are obsessed about titles.
[SPEAKER_09]: We focus on actually, how do you solve things?
[SPEAKER_09]: How do you make things happen?
[SPEAKER_09]: Because that's who we are.
[SPEAKER_09]: Business people who fix things.
[SPEAKER_15]: OK, so reform now led by a job share.
[SPEAKER_09]: Led by Nigel Farage, chaired by Richard Tice.
[SPEAKER_09]: You want net zero immigration.
[SPEAKER_09]: And we work in the office.
[SPEAKER_09]: We don't work from home.
[SPEAKER_15]: You want net zero immigration.
[SPEAKER_15]: We have massive vacancies in the NHS and in the care sector.
[SPEAKER_15]: What would you do about them?
[SPEAKER_09]: We want to freeze lawful immigration with the exception of health care.
[SPEAKER_09]: But let's remember, we've got 5.2 million people, one in eight of the working age population, on out-of-work benefits.
[SPEAKER_09]: British citizens, we need to get those people, as many as possible, back into work.
[SPEAKER_09]: We've got to help businesses and motivate businesses.
[SPEAKER_09]: So those people into the NHS and into the care sector.
[SPEAKER_09]: We've got to skill up and train up our own people.
[SPEAKER_09]: Of course it does.
[SPEAKER_09]: These are urgent sectors that need jobs now.
[SPEAKER_09]: But in the 1980s and 1990s, we were training up our own people, our own young people, straight out of school into wards, into universities.
[SPEAKER_09]: Why don't we freeze the training caps on training doctors and nurses?
[SPEAKER_09]: This is madness.
[SPEAKER_09]: We've got to focus on our own people, skilling people up, motivating, training, developing young people.
[SPEAKER_15]: That still leaves a gap in the meantime.
[SPEAKER_09]: And that's why we have an exception for health care and social care.
[SPEAKER_09]: But we have to train our own people.
[SPEAKER_09]: That's the right thing for a government to do for British citizens.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, you're talking about stuff that costs money, and yet you're talking about tens of billions of pounds in tax cuts.
[SPEAKER_09]: Which is why we've got a costed plan.
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, let me just look at some of your costings.
[SPEAKER_15]: So you say you'll make £91 billion by cutting government waste.
[SPEAKER_09]: No, no, I'm sorry.
[SPEAKER_09]: If you're going to do your research, get it right.
[SPEAKER_09]: Go on, you tell me.
[SPEAKER_09]: We're going to scrap net zero, which will make no difference to global climate change.
[SPEAKER_09]: That will save at least £30 billion a year.
[SPEAKER_09]: I'll come to net zero.
[SPEAKER_15]: Tell me about government waste.
[SPEAKER_15]: How much are you going to make?
[SPEAKER_09]: The first thing we've got to do is...
[SPEAKER_15]: It says £91 billion on your website.
[SPEAKER_09]: The second thing you ought to do, after scrapping net zero, you can save about £35 billion a year by the Bank of England not voluntarily paying taxpayers cash interest on the money it printed, enriching the citizens' institutions.
[SPEAKER_09]: So between those two, that's £60 billion.
[SPEAKER_09]: And then, look, everybody knows there's government waste anyway.
[SPEAKER_09]: Let me tell you what you've got to do.
[SPEAKER_09]: You've got to cut out the back office waste and invest it in frontline growth and public services.
[SPEAKER_09]: That's how you get the economy growing again.
[SPEAKER_15]: So how much are you going to shrink the civil service?
[SPEAKER_15]: How much money will you make from that?
[SPEAKER_09]: It's about cutting out the waste, cutting out the ridiculous diversity, equality and inclusion roles.
[SPEAKER_09]: All of this waste that everybody knows is there, but no one's got the courage and the guts to tell it as it is.
[SPEAKER_15]: The entire civil service, that entire civil service salary is £15 billion a year.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you realise there are six... Are you going to sack everyone?
[SPEAKER_09]: Do you realise there are 600,000 more people working in the public sector since 2019 and yet the quality of public services has gone down, which means productivity and performance has collapsed.
[SPEAKER_09]: It's a disaster.
[SPEAKER_09]: Unless we change things, unless we turn things around, we are going bust.
[SPEAKER_15]: You are still talking about...
[SPEAKER_15]: not enough cuts to match the massive tax cuts that you're talking about.
[SPEAKER_15]: And you mentioned net zero.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let me ask you about net zero, because in order for net zero to save money, in the way you're saying it's going to, you have to assume that climate change isn't going to cost anything.
[SPEAKER_09]: Climate change is real, but it's much cheaper to adapt to it than to try and think that you can spend tens and tens of billions of pounds, totaling trillions of pounds.
[SPEAKER_09]: Adaptation costs are huge.
[SPEAKER_09]: They're far less than thinking you can stop the power of the sun, you can stop the power of volcanoes, and you can stop sea level rise.
[SPEAKER_09]: That's ridiculous.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you believe in man-made climate change?
[SPEAKER_09]: Of course I do.
[SPEAKER_15]: In man-made climate change?
[SPEAKER_09]: If you listened to me a few minutes ago, I said that climate change is real.
[SPEAKER_09]: But it's much cheaper to adapt to it than foolishly think you can stop the power of the sun.
[SPEAKER_09]: Net zero is the wrong thing at the wrong price in the wrong time frame.
[SPEAKER_09]: Do you know what it's doing?
[SPEAKER_09]: It's killing our jobs.
[SPEAKER_09]: It's killing our industries like the steel industry, the automotive industry.
[SPEAKER_09]: It's killing our economy.
[SPEAKER_09]: And it's killing old people who can't afford their heating bills.
[SPEAKER_15]: Every single person, every single kind of organisation that's locked into the cost of net zero says there is a massive cost if we don't act.
[SPEAKER_15]: No one else agrees with your £30 billion cost.
[SPEAKER_09]: Do you know how much the National Grid thinks that net zero is going to cost?
[SPEAKER_09]: Is it £2 trillion or is it £3 trillion?
[SPEAKER_09]: I'll tell you, it's £3 trillion, which is way more than the sort of sums I'm talking about.
[SPEAKER_09]: The reason that no one agrees with me from the establishment is because they don't want to talk about it.
[SPEAKER_09]: They don't want to admit it.
[SPEAKER_09]: We're the only country that is obsessed with net zero, and it's killing our jobs as we spend our jobs and our money.
[SPEAKER_15]: And just on this before you go on, you say you believe in man-made climate change.
[SPEAKER_15]: On your own website, it basically says this isn't man-made, but the globe has been warming and cooling over many years.
[SPEAKER_09]: Which it has for millions of years.
[SPEAKER_15]: So you don't believe that man-made climate change is warming the planet?
[SPEAKER_09]: Man-made CO2 emissions is somewhere between about 3% and maybe 10% of all CO2 emissions, because lots of people don't realise there's lots of natural CO2 emissions.
[SPEAKER_09]: But this is a massive scientific debate.
[SPEAKER_09]: There's different sides of it, but let me make this point clear.
[SPEAKER_15]: OK, let's talk about the debate.
[SPEAKER_15]: In 2021, a study came out that said 99% of thousands and thousands of studies on climate change say human activity is causing climate change.
[SPEAKER_09]: As I've just said to you, man-made CO2 emissions is less than 10% of all CO2 emissions.
[SPEAKER_15]: Why do you think you know better than the world scientists on this issue?
[SPEAKER_09]: What about the thousands of scientists who actually agree with me, but of course the establishment doesn't want to talk about?
[SPEAKER_09]: The truth is, I'll come back to my original point, climate change is real, but it's cheaper to adapt to it than think you can stop it.
[SPEAKER_15]: But you don't basically think man-made is driving it?
[SPEAKER_09]: Man-made CO2 emissions is a thing.
[SPEAKER_09]: Let's reduce them sensibly, affordably, and let's not kill our jobs, kill our economy, and kill our old people.
[SPEAKER_09]: That's a disaster.
[SPEAKER_09]: No one else is doing it.
[SPEAKER_09]: We shouldn't do it.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let me do a quick fire on you.
[SPEAKER_15]: If you were to put money on it, how many seats do you think Reform UK are going to win?
[SPEAKER_09]: We will win seats.
[SPEAKER_09]: And I'm convinced we'll win seats.
[SPEAKER_15]: One word, how many?
[SPEAKER_09]: I'm not going to say how many.
[SPEAKER_09]: What I'm going to say is we're going to get millions and millions of votes.
[SPEAKER_09]: And that's a very good thing.
[SPEAKER_15]: Would you be OK with Nigel Farage, if elected, going to the US to help Donald Trump get elected?
[SPEAKER_09]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_15]: Did you watch the head-to-head?
[SPEAKER_09]: I watched bits of it whilst I remained awake.
[SPEAKER_09]: I mean, it was pretty dull, wasn't it?
[SPEAKER_09]: Two forms of socialism.
[SPEAKER_09]: No one answered any questions.
[SPEAKER_09]: Neither of them... Who won?
[SPEAKER_09]: Neither of them, because neither of them had a plan for growth.
[SPEAKER_09]: We've got the longest recession per person since records began 70 years ago.
[SPEAKER_09]: Neither of them talked about growth.
[SPEAKER_09]: Neither of them talked about the impact of mass immigration making people poorer and reducing the quality of our life on housing, on health,
[SPEAKER_15]: And one of them, Keir Starmer.
[SPEAKER_15]: You talk a lot about, in your literature, you talk about Starmageddon.
[SPEAKER_15]: You basically think he is the most dangerous thing that can happen in Britain.
[SPEAKER_15]: So why are you trying to help him get elected?
[SPEAKER_09]: They're both as bad as each other.
[SPEAKER_09]: They're both socialism, high taxes, big state, mass immigration.
[SPEAKER_09]: We're all going to get poorer.
[SPEAKER_15]: But you accept that Reform UK are doing well.
[SPEAKER_15]: is going to help Keir Starmer get elected.
[SPEAKER_09]: The more millions of votes we get, the more likely we become the opposition to what is an inevitable Labour government.
[SPEAKER_09]: And then we're the opposition as we approach 28, 29.
[SPEAKER_09]: And that's the right thing for us.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let me ask you something your leader recently said.
[SPEAKER_15]: Nigel Farage said many young Muslims don't share his values.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you know many young Muslims?
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you agree with Nigel Farage?
[SPEAKER_09]: I know many Muslims, but the reality is the Henry Jackson survey with J-O partners showed that in 18 to 24 years over 20% believe in jihad.
[SPEAKER_09]: Almost 50% didn't think that people, that Jewish people... And what do Muslim friends you're talking about think about?
[SPEAKER_09]: Almost 50% didn't think
[SPEAKER_09]: that Jewish people were raped and murdered on October the 7th.
[SPEAKER_09]: And I just don't think those represent British values.
[SPEAKER_09]: If you believe in jihad, if you want Sharia law in the United Kingdom, that's not who we are.
[SPEAKER_15]: Lots of people who are protesting are watching the scenes unfolding in Gaza and they find it heartbreaking.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you find what you're seeing in Gaza heartbreaking?
[SPEAKER_09]: It's heartbreaking.
[SPEAKER_09]: Any war zone is heartbreaking, of course.
[SPEAKER_09]: And the more we can do to bring wars to an end with a negotiated settlement, the better, the faster, clearly.
[SPEAKER_15]: If you had the power, what would you be saying to Benjamin Netanyahu about this right now?
[SPEAKER_09]: If I had the power, I'd be saying that to resolve the whole Gaza situation, Hamas, a brutal, murderous terror group, must not be involved in governing Hamas.
[SPEAKER_09]: And I don't think the international community is discussing the future governance of Hamas enough.
[SPEAKER_15]: What would you say to Israel about the situation in Gaza?
[SPEAKER_15]: Would you be asking them to slow down?
[SPEAKER_09]: Israel is losing the propaganda war.
[SPEAKER_09]: Look, the reality is, of course Israel has the right to defend itself.
[SPEAKER_09]: but it's got to make very careful judgments.
[SPEAKER_09]: And at the moment, when it makes mistakes, which it admits it's made, then it has to defend itself smartly and cleverly.
[SPEAKER_09]: But we have to get rid of Hamas.
[SPEAKER_15]: Richard Tice, thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_15]: Next up, we have the Green Party and their co-leader, Adrian Ramsey.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's find out a little bit more about the party and its promises.
[SPEAKER_04]: So the Green Party is proposing practical policies that will help our economy and help the environment.
[SPEAKER_15]: Why have one party leader when you can have two?
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, the Greens co-leaders Carla Denyer and Adrian Ramsey would agree.
[SPEAKER_15]: Elected in 2021, the pair have promised to bring a greater degree of professionalism to the party's organisation and campaigning.
[SPEAKER_15]: For the very first time, the Green Party is aiming to field a candidate at every count in England and Wales, but their focus is very much on four seats where they think they have the best chance.
[SPEAKER_15]: They say, therefore a fairer and greener country and predictably have a raft of environmental pledges.
[SPEAKER_15]: These include better insulated homes and cleaner rivers.
[SPEAKER_15]: But in economic policy they also want a pay ratio that makes sure the highest paid individuals in an organisation cannot earn more than 10 times the lowest.
[SPEAKER_15]: With the biggest parties accused of environmental policy U-turns, could the Greens capitalise and finally make gains at Westminster?
[SPEAKER_15]: Adrian Ramsey, co-leader of the Green Party, is here.
[SPEAKER_15]: Adrian, welcome.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's start with your one-minute pitch.
[SPEAKER_05]: This election is really quite boring so far, isn't it?
[SPEAKER_05]: And yet it really matters, because it's our chance as a country to say what sort of future we want.
[SPEAKER_05]: And people I speak to on the doorsteps every day in East Anglia really want a change from this Conservative government, which has let us down for so long.
[SPEAKER_05]: And yet the changes that Labour are offering are just making small tweaks.
[SPEAKER_05]: They're really timid.
[SPEAKER_05]: Changes that are not going to tackle the big issues of our time, that our NHS is creaking, that people can't get access to affordable housing, that our rivers are polluted, that we're all suffering from a cost of living crisis.
[SPEAKER_05]: We need real hope and real change if we're going to respond to the challenges that our country faces.
[SPEAKER_05]: And that's why we need a group of Green MPs in the next Parliament to push the next government to be bolder, both on restoring our public services and on protecting our environment.
[SPEAKER_05]: And the environment has been far too left out of this debate.
[SPEAKER_05]: So I'm asking people to vote Green on the 4th of July.
[SPEAKER_15]: That's your time up.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, you are the Green Party.
[SPEAKER_15]: The environment is the number one issue.
[SPEAKER_15]: Friends of the Earth say they are sceptical about your aim to eliminate all emissions in 10 years.
[SPEAKER_15]: Shouldn't you just be realistic about what is achievable?
[SPEAKER_05]: Friends of the Earth recently did an independent assessment of all the party's policies on the environment.
[SPEAKER_05]: I mean, that is what I'm quoting.
[SPEAKER_05]: And they had the Green Party clearly first in that assessment.
[SPEAKER_15]: But they said they're sceptical about being able to eliminate emissions within 10 years.
[SPEAKER_05]: Well, we need to set a timescale for net zero emissions that's both ambitious but is also achievable.
[SPEAKER_05]: And if you look at studies, for example, such as the one by the University of Oxford at the end of last year, it showed that we could produce renewable energy in this country that exceeds our demands for energy if we really put that investment in.
[SPEAKER_05]: Claire, in the audience tonight in the debate, said that both the main parties, the Conservatives and Labour, have broken promises on climate.
[SPEAKER_05]: And she was absolutely right.
[SPEAKER_05]: And in the answers they gave, what they omitted to say is that they're not willing to put the investment in that's needed if we're going to seize the huge opportunity we have.
[SPEAKER_05]: To solve our energy crisis.
[SPEAKER_15]: Investment, even a group like Friends of the Earth thinks 10 years is probably too ambitious.
[SPEAKER_15]: And you do have to take people with you.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, you mentioned the cost of living crisis in your opening pitch.
[SPEAKER_15]: Think about heat pumps, for example.
[SPEAKER_15]: Yes, there are grants, but it's expensive for people to swap out heat pumps.
[SPEAKER_15]: You have to take people with you.
[SPEAKER_05]: Absolutely, we have to take people with us.
[SPEAKER_05]: And the solutions to the climate crisis are also solutions to the cost of living crisis.
[SPEAKER_05]: The energy bills are one of the main reasons why people's bills are skyrocketing.
[SPEAKER_05]: And if we look at some of the reasons why that's the case, we have the leakiest homes in Europe here in the UK.
[SPEAKER_05]: heating is going out of their doors, out of their windows.
[SPEAKER_05]: If we were to have a nationwide programme to insulate people's homes, it keeps bills down, keeps homes warm, just as if we invest in renewable energy, that helps tackle the energy crisis.
[SPEAKER_05]: So this is very much about cost of living as well as the environment.
[SPEAKER_15]: And I'm going to come to your costings and all of this, but isn't there also a question of influence here?
[SPEAKER_15]: Like you mentioned, both the Conservatives and Labour have been accused of watering down environmental pledges.
[SPEAKER_15]: But you can't stop that happening.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, if I think about the Greens in Scotland or the Greens in Germany, they've had massive influence in government.
[SPEAKER_15]: You're gunning for four seats.
[SPEAKER_15]: Where's your ambition?
[SPEAKER_05]: Our ambition is that we desperately need to push forward on the bold action that's needed, both on addressing the climate and nature crises, the defining issues of our time, and on creating a more equal society.
[SPEAKER_05]: Where's your influence in Westminster?
[SPEAKER_05]: All the polls suggest we're on track for a Labour government.
[SPEAKER_05]: The question is, do we want Keir Starmer to have such a big majority that he can continue to make U-turns all the time on climate or on funding for public services?
[SPEAKER_05]: If there's a group of Green MPs in Parliament, and we're standing a record number of candidates in this election, going into it in better shape than ever before.
[SPEAKER_05]: We've got our top four target seats.
[SPEAKER_05]: If we win those, we'll be able to push this new government in the right direction.
[SPEAKER_05]: If they don't have that voice in Parliament, they'll be able to just continue to pretend that these little tweaks that Labour's proposing is actually going to address these big issues of our times.
[SPEAKER_05]: Do you really think that the Labour proposals that we've heard tonight are going to enable us to tackle the climate crisis, to address the fact that...
[SPEAKER_15]: I think that you're not going to be able to influence it because you're gunning for four seats.
[SPEAKER_15]: Whilst the Greens are a huge force in other countries.
[SPEAKER_05]: And in this country, the Green Party has increased the number of elected Greens fivefold in the last five years, winning seats from Labour and from the Conservatives in all corners of the country.
[SPEAKER_05]: People are desperate for change.
[SPEAKER_05]: They're desperate for authentic voices in politics.
[SPEAKER_05]: And we're the only party that's being honest in this election and saying that if we're going to fund that transition to a green economy in a fair way and restoring
[SPEAKER_05]: our NHS, then we are going to need to ask the very richest in society, the multimillionaires, the billionaires, to pay modestly more in tax to bring about that transition.
[SPEAKER_15]: OK, I'm going to talk to you about that, but let's just do this quickfire section.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, you talk quite a lot in your policies about liberalising access to illegal drugs.
[SPEAKER_15]: Have you ever taken drugs?
[SPEAKER_05]: I've never taken illegal drugs, no.
[SPEAKER_15]: Would you press the nuclear button?
[SPEAKER_15]: No.
[SPEAKER_15]: What is the least green thing you do?
[SPEAKER_05]: Well, we all try to be as green as we can.
[SPEAKER_05]: I do have a car.
[SPEAKER_05]: I use it when I need to.
[SPEAKER_05]: Petrol car?
[SPEAKER_05]: A hybrid car, because when I got it, I lived in a home that didn't have the charging infrastructure.
[SPEAKER_05]: And we've got to improve the charging infrastructure.
[SPEAKER_15]: Who do you think won tonight's head-to-head?
[SPEAKER_05]: Well, no one won it because there were no bold ideas.
[SPEAKER_05]: There was no honesty about how we're going to fund the changes that people actually need.
[SPEAKER_05]: And people are really, you know, democracy was the loser because there was no real promise of a brighter future.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let me ask you about Gaza.
[SPEAKER_15]: We can't go into specifics about constituencies here, but you have been accused of circulating letters that look like they're from concerned neighbours saying, oh, I really like what the Green Party do, but actually they're your election leaflets.
[SPEAKER_05]: Well, any leaflets that we put out say very clearly that they're printed and published by the Green Party, as we have to do.
[SPEAKER_05]: And most of the leaflets we put out say very clearly, vote Green at this election, because that's what we want people to do.
[SPEAKER_15]: Tiny, tiny writing.
[SPEAKER_15]: It looked like it was from a neighbour.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, the Jewish Chronicle said it was stirring up division.
[SPEAKER_05]: That's the opposite of what we're seeking to do.
[SPEAKER_05]: We have to recognise that Jewish communities and Muslim communities in this country and around the world are feeling very vulnerable at a time of a horrendous international conflict where tens of thousands of people have lost their lives, where we still have hostages that have not been released.
[SPEAKER_05]: And we've just got to talk about these issues in a really sensitive way that recognises the trauma that people are going through.
[SPEAKER_15]: So you're sorry if the Jewish Chronicle felt that that was stirring up division?
[SPEAKER_05]: It absolutely was not doing so and the Green Party is really clear that we want to be about building communities, building cross-community understanding in this country and beyond.
[SPEAKER_15]: Let's talk about costings.
[SPEAKER_15]: You've got quite a lot of big policies and I wondered if you thought about how much they cost.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean how much do you think it costs to provide free school meals to all children, primary and secondary children in England?
[SPEAKER_05]: Well, we will have a fully costed manifesto.
[SPEAKER_05]: Do you know how much that would cost?
[SPEAKER_05]: I don't have that figure off the top of my head, but I will.
[SPEAKER_15]: I'll tell you what the Institute for Fiscal Studies, because I asked them, £2.5 billion.
[SPEAKER_05]: Our costed manifesto is coming out on the 12th of June.
[SPEAKER_05]: It will set out clearly the costings of everything we're proposing to do and how we would pay for it.
[SPEAKER_05]: And I can tell you exactly where we would raise that money from, because that's the difficult question.
[SPEAKER_15]: We'll talk about the raising the money in a minute, but you say everyone should get access to an NHS dentist.
[SPEAKER_15]: Absolutely.
[SPEAKER_15]: Have you been to a dentist lately?
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, that is an entire overhaul of the system.
[SPEAKER_15]: How much would that cost?
[SPEAKER_05]: We're proposing £3 billion a year extra for dentistry to enable everyone to get access to an NHS dentist.
[SPEAKER_05]: Where I am in East Anglia, we have a dental desert, just as so much of our country does.
[SPEAKER_05]: People are resorting to pulling out their own teeth, or to going without treatment, or for driving on hours on end to get to an NHS dentist.
[SPEAKER_05]: But this costs a lot of money.
[SPEAKER_05]: You talk about taxing the top 1%.
[SPEAKER_05]: We're saying that we're willing to put the money
[SPEAKER_15]: When you speak to experts and they say, trying to tax the top 1% on their own is really difficult.
[SPEAKER_15]: People change their behaviour.
[SPEAKER_15]: They are pretty good at avoiding tax.
[SPEAKER_15]: You're not going to raise enough from that.
[SPEAKER_05]: We have been speaking to experts, many experts, who've proposed a wide range of different ways in which you can ask the very richest in society, people with wealth of 10 million or more, to pay modestly more.
[SPEAKER_05]: We're talking about 1% on assets over 10 million.
[SPEAKER_05]: But if you did that, you could raise tens of billions by the end of this next parliament.
[SPEAKER_15]: Cancel all road building schemes.
[SPEAKER_05]: Countries that have brought in a wealth tax, like, for example, Switzerland and Spain, have done so very effectively.
[SPEAKER_05]: And it makes a big difference if we're going to put in this investment that we need.
[SPEAKER_05]: We're the only party that's being honest in this election.
[SPEAKER_15]: Well, actually, I mean, the IFS would say these are difficult taxes to raise, the amounts that you're talking about.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, there's things you talk about.
[SPEAKER_15]: You say you're going to scrap all road building schemes.
[SPEAKER_15]: I mean, how are you going to get around in your car?
[SPEAKER_05]: Well, there's lots of roads already, actually, and a lot of the roads we have already are in a terrible state.
[SPEAKER_05]: There's a lot of people who really don't like potholes.
[SPEAKER_05]: Indeed.
[SPEAKER_05]: And that often doesn't get the funding.
[SPEAKER_05]: That's in the road building budget.
[SPEAKER_05]: OK, so potholes will still be filled.
[SPEAKER_05]: Road maintenance, of course, needs money.
[SPEAKER_05]: But you can spend huge amounts of money on new roads, which if we put that money into public transport measures, which benefit people who haven't got cars as well as those who have, and we bring the price down, I mean, so many
[SPEAKER_05]: people don't have access to a local bus or a decent train service and we need to invest that.
[SPEAKER_05]: We need to bring train prices down to be affordable for people to be able to use.
[SPEAKER_15]: Just a couple more.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you think the UK accepts enough refugees?
[SPEAKER_05]: I think that the UK has a long tradition of welcoming people who are fleeing torture or persecution or poverty and that's a tradition we're proud of and it needs to be done in an international way.
[SPEAKER_15]: Do you think we accept enough refugees?
[SPEAKER_05]: Well, I don't think this is about putting an arbitrary number on the issue.
[SPEAKER_05]: I think it's about being welcoming and looking at the reasons why so many people are fleeing their homes.
[SPEAKER_05]: poverty around the world, a changing climate.
[SPEAKER_05]: I want to be in a situation where we tackle the root causes of why so many people are fleeing their homes, whether that's a changing climate, whether that's war, whether that's poverty.
[SPEAKER_05]: And so the Green Party has clear commitments in the manifesto that's coming out to not just restore the global aid
[SPEAKER_05]: budget to 0.7% but to increase it further, to put more money into climate finance that helps the poorest countries in the world to both reduce their emissions but adapt to the changes that are happening as well.
[SPEAKER_15]: And as one of the richest countries in the world... You're not going to put a number on it but essentially you think that we should increase the numbers overall.
[SPEAKER_05]: I think that we need to play our role alongside other richer countries around the world in being a place that people can go to and tackle the root causes of why people are seeking asylum.
[SPEAKER_15]: Aidan Ramsey, thank you very much for your time.
[SPEAKER_15]: And there we have it.
[SPEAKER_15]: You've heard what the parties have to offer.
[SPEAKER_15]: It is now over to you to decide who gets your vote.
[SPEAKER_15]: For a reaction to and analysis of what you've heard from all the party leaders on ITV tonight, the news is next.
[SPEAKER_15]: And for viewers in Wales, after the news, a chance to hear a full interview with ReNap Your Worth, leader of Plaid Cymru.
[SPEAKER_15]: That's at 10 minutes to midnight.
[SPEAKER_15]: On the 13th of June, there'll be another election debate here on ITV.
[SPEAKER_15]: Seven of the political parties have been invited.
[SPEAKER_15]: Head online to get more on that, plus all the very latest from the election campaign, so far on our streaming site, ITVX.
[SPEAKER_15]: From me, though, have a very good night.